1:1 In the begin god creat the heaven and the earth.

1:2 and the earth wa without form, and void; and dark wa upon
th face of the deep. and the spirit of god move upon the face of the
waters.

1:3 and god said, let there be light: and there wa light.

1:4 and god saw the light, that it wa good: and god divid the light
from the darkness.

1:5 and god call the light day, and the dark he call night.
and the even and the morn were the first day.

1:6 and god said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
and let it divid the water from the waters.

1:7 and god made the firmament, and divid the water which were
und the firmament from the water which were abov the firmament:
and it wa so.

1:8 and god call the firmament heaven. and the even and the
morn were the second day.

1:9 and god said, let the water under the heaven be gather together
unto one place, and let the dri land appear: and it wa so.

1:10 and god call the dri land earth; and the gather togeth of
th water call he seas: and god saw that it wa good.

1:11 and god said, let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
seed, and the fruit tree yield fruit after hi kind, whose seed is
in itself, upon the earth: and it wa so.

1:12 and the earth brought forth grass, and herb yield seed after
hi kind, and the tree yield fruit, whose seed wa in itself, after
hi kind: and god saw that it wa good.

1:13 and the even and the morn were the third day.

1:14 and god said, let there be light in the firmament of the heaven
to divid the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and years: 1:15 and let them be for light in
th firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was
so.

1:16 and god made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the star also.

1:17 and god set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth, 1:18 and to rule over the day and over the night, and
to divid the light from the darkness: and god saw that it wa good.

1:19 and the even and the morn were the fourth day.

1:20 and god said, let the water bring forth abundantli the moving
creatur that hath life, and fowl that may fli abov the earth in the
open firmament of heaven.

1:21 and god creat great whales, and everi live creatur that
moveth, which the water brought forth abundantly, after their kind,
and everi wing fowl after hi kind: and god saw that it wa good.

1:22 and god bless them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
th water in the seas, and let fowl multipli in the earth.

1:23 and the even and the morn were the fifth day.

1:24 and god said, let the earth bring forth the live creatur after
hi kind, cattle, and creep thing, and beast of the earth after his
kind: and it wa so.

1:25 and god made the beast of the earth after hi kind, and cattle
aft their kind, and everi thing that creepeth upon the earth after
hi kind: and god saw that it wa good.

1:26 and god said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness:
and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over
everi creep thing that creepeth upon the earth.

1:27 So god creat man in hi own image, in the imag of god created
h him; male and femal creat he them.

1:28 and god bless them, and god said unto them, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdu it: and have dominion
ov the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
liv thing that moveth upon the earth.

1:29 and god said, behold, I have given you everi herb bear seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth, and everi tree, in the which
i the fruit of a tree yield seed; to you it shall be for meat.

1:30 and to everi beast of the earth, and to everi fowl of the air,
and to everi thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is
life, I have given everi green herb for meat: and it wa so.

1:31 and god saw everi thing that he had made, and, behold, it was
veri good. and the even and the morn were the sixth day.

2:1 thu the heaven and the earth were finished, and all the host of
them.

2:2 and on the seventh day god end hi work which he had made; and
h rest on the seventh day from all hi work which he had made.

2:3 and god bless the seventh day, and sanctifi it: becaus that
in it he had rest from all hi work which god creat and made.

2:4 these are the gener of the heaven and of the earth when
they were created, in the day that the lord god made the earth and the
heavens, 2:5 and everi plant of the field befor it wa in the earth,
and everi herb of the field befor it grew: for the lord god had not
caus it to rain upon the earth, and there wa not a man to till the
ground.

2:6 but there went up a mist from the earth, and water the whole
fac of the ground.

2:7 and the lord god form man of the dust of the ground, and
breath into hi nostril the breath of life; and man becam a living
soul.

2:8 and the lord god plant a garden eastward in eden; and there he
put the man whom he had formed.

2:9 and out of the ground made the lord god to grow everi tree that is
pleas to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledg of good and evil.

2:10 and a river went out of eden to water the garden; and from thence
it wa parted, and becam into four heads.

2:11 the name of the first is pison: that is it which compasseth the
whol land of havilah, where there is gold; 2:12 and the gold of that
land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

2:13 and the name of the second river is gihon: the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of ethiopia.

2:14 and the name of the third river is hiddekel: that is it which
goeth toward the east of assyria. and the fourth river is euphrates.

2:15 and the lord god took the man, and put him into the garden of
eden to dress it and to keep it.

2:16 and the lord god command the man, saying, Of everi tree of the
garden thou mayest freeli eat: 2:17 but of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shalt sure die.

2:18 and the lord god said, It is not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

2:19 and out of the ground the lord god form everi beast of the
field, and everi fowl of the air; and brought them unto adam to see
what he would call them: and whatsoev adam call everi living
creature, that wa the name thereof.

2:20 and adam gave name to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air,
and to everi beast of the field; but for adam there wa not found an
help meet for him.

2:21 and the lord god caus a deep sleep to fall upon adam, and he
slept: and he took one of hi ribs, and close up the flesh instead
thereof; 2:22 and the rib, which the lord god had taken from man, made
h a woman, and brought her unto the man.

2:23 and adam said, thi is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh: she shall be call woman, becaus she wa taken out of man.

2:24 therefor shall a man leav hi father and hi mother, and shall
cleav unto hi wife: and they shall be one flesh.

2:25 and they were both naked, the man and hi wife, and were not
ashamed.

3:1 now the serpent wa more subtil than ani beast of the field which
th lord god had made. and he said unto the woman, yea, hath god said,
y shall not eat of everi tree of the garden?  3:2 and the woman said
unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the tree of the garden:
3:3 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden,
god hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
y die.

3:4 and the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not sure die: 3:5
for god doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eye shall
b opened, and ye shall be as gods, know good and evil.

3:6 and when the woman saw that the tree wa good for food, and that
it wa pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desir to make one
wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto
h husband with her; and he did eat.

3:7 and the eye of them both were opened, and they knew that they
wer naked; and they sew fig leav together, and made themselves
aprons.

3:8 and they heard the voic of the lord god walk in the garden in
th cool of the day: and adam and hi wife hid themselv from the
pres of the lord god amongst the tree of the garden.

3:9 and the lord god call unto adam, and said unto him, where art
thou?  3:10 and he said, I heard thi voic in the garden, and I was
afraid, becaus I wa naked; and I hid myself.

3:11 and he said, who told thee that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten
of the tree, whereof I command thee that thou shouldest not eat?
3:12 and the man said, the woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she
gav me of the tree, and I did eat.

3:13 and the lord god said unto the woman, what is thi that thou hast
done? and the woman said, the serpent beguil me, and I did eat.

3:14 and the lord god said unto the serpent, becaus thou hast done
this, thou art curs abov all cattle, and abov everi beast of the
field; upon thi belli shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the
day of thi life: 3:15 and I will put enmiti between thee and the
woman, and between thi seed and her seed; it shall bruis thi head,
and thou shalt bruis hi heel.

3:16 unto the woman he said, I will greatli multipli thi sorrow and
thi conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy
desir shall be to thi husband, and he shall rule over thee.

3:17 and unto adam he said, becaus thou hast hearken unto the voice
of thi wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I command thee,
saying, thou shalt not eat of it: curs is the ground for thi sake;
in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the day of thi life; 3:18 thorns
also and thistl shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the
herb of the field; 3:19 In the sweat of thi face shalt thou eat bread,
til thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for
dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.

3:20 and adam call hi wife' name eve; becaus she wa the mother
of all living.

3:21 unto adam also and to hi wife did the lord god make coat of
skins, and cloth them.

3:22 and the lord god said, behold, the man is becom as one of us, to
know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth hi hand, and take also
of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: 3:23 therefor the
lord god sent him forth from the garden of eden, to till the ground
from whenc he wa taken.

3:24 So he drove out the man; and he place at the east of the garden
of eden cherubims, and a flame sword which turn everi way, to keep
th way of the tree of life.

4:1 and adam knew eve hi wife; and she conceived, and bare cain, and
said, I have gotten a man from the lord.

4:2 and she again bare hi brother abel. and abel wa a keeper of
sheep, but cain wa a tiller of the ground.

4:3 and in process of time it came to pass, that cain brought of the
fruit of the ground an offer unto the lord.

4:4 and abel, he also brought of the firstl of hi flock and of
th fat thereof. and the lord had respect unto abel and to his
offering: 4:5 but unto cain and to hi offer he had not respect.
and cain wa veri wroth, and hi counten fell.

4:6 and the lord said unto cain, whi art thou wroth? and whi is thy
counten fallen?  4:7 If thou doest well, shalt thou not be
accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. and unto
the shall be hi desire, and thou shalt rule over him.

4:8 and cain talk with abel hi brother: and it came to pass, when
they were in the field, that cain rose up against abel hi brother,
and slew him.

4:9 and the lord said unto cain, where is abel thi brother? and he
said, I know not: Am I my brother' keeper?  4:10 and he said, what
hast thou done? the voic of thi brother' blood crieth unto me from
th ground.

4:11 and now art thou curs from the earth, which hath open her
mouth to receiv thi brother' blood from thi hand; 4:12 when thou
tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her
strength; a fugit and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.

4:13 and cain said unto the lord, My punish is greater than I can
bear.

4:14 behold, thou hast driven me out thi day from the face of the
earth; and from thi face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugit and
a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that everi one
that findeth me shall slay me.

4:15 and the lord said unto him, therefor whosoev slayeth cain,
veng shall be taken on him sevenfold. and the lord set a mark
upon cain, lest ani find him should kill him.

4:16 and cain went out from the presenc of the lord, and dwelt in the
land of nod, on the east of eden.

4:17 and cain knew hi wife; and she conceived, and bare enoch: and he
build a city, and call the name of the city, after the name of his
son, enoch.

4:18 and unto enoch wa born irad: and irad begat mehujael: and
mehujael begat methusael: and methusael begat lamech.

4:19 and lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one wa adah,
and the name of the other zillah.

4:20 and adah bare jabal: he wa the father of such as dwell in tents,
and of such as have cattle.

4:21 and hi brother' name wa jubal: he wa the father of all such
a handl the harp and organ.

4:22 and zillah, she also bare tubalcain, an instruct of every
artific in brass and iron: and the sister of tubalcain wa naamah.

4:23 and lamech said unto hi wives, adah and zillah, hear my voice;
y wive of lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to
mi wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

4:24 If cain shall be aveng sevenfold, truli lamech seventi and
sevenfold.

4:25 and adam knew hi wife again; and she bare a son, and call his
nam seth: for god, said she, hath appoint me anoth seed instead
of abel, whom cain slew.

4:26 and to seth, to him also there wa born a son; and he call his
nam enos: then began men to call upon the name of the lord.

5:1 thi is the book of the gener of adam. In the day that god
creat man, in the like of god made he him; 5:2 male and female
cr he them; and bless them, and call their name adam, in the
day when they were created.

5:3 and adam live an hundr and thirti years, and begat a son in his
own likeness, and after hi image; and call hi name seth: 5:4 and
th day of adam after he had begotten seth were eight hundr years:
and he begat son and daughters: 5:5 and all the day that adam lived
wer nine hundr and thirti years: and he died.

5:6 and seth live an hundr and five years, and begat enos: 5:7 and
seth live after he begat eno eight hundr and seven years, and
begat son and daughters: 5:8 and all the day of seth were nine
hundr and twelv years: and he died.

5:9 and eno live nineti years, and begat cainan: 5:10 and eno lived
aft he begat cainan eight hundr and fifteen years, and begat sons
and daughters: 5:11 and all the day of eno were nine hundr and
fiv years: and he died.

5:12 and cainan live seventi year and begat mahalaleel: 5:13 and
cainan live after he begat mahalaleel eight hundr and forti years,
and begat son and daughters: 5:14 and all the day of cainan were
nin hundr and ten years: and he died.

5:15 and mahalaleel live sixti and five years, and begat jared: 5:16
and mahalaleel live after he begat jare eight hundr and thirty
years, and begat son and daughters: 5:17 and all the day of
mahalaleel were eight hundr nineti and five years: and he died.

5:18 and jare live an hundr sixti and two years, and he begat
enoch: 5:19 and jare live after he begat enoch eight hundr years,
and begat son and daughters: 5:20 and all the day of jare were nine
hundr sixti and two years: and he died.

5:21 and enoch live sixti and five years, and begat methuselah: 5:22
and enoch walk with god after he begat methuselah three hundred
years, and begat son and daughters: 5:23 and all the day of enoch
wer three hundr sixti and five years: 5:24 and enoch walk with
god: and he wa not; for god took him.

5:25 and methuselah live an hundr eighti and seven years, and begat
lamech.

5:26 and methuselah live after he begat lamech seven hundr eighty
and two years, and begat son and daughters: 5:27 and all the day of
methuselah were nine hundr sixti and nine years: and he died.

5:28 and lamech live an hundr eighti and two years, and begat a
son: 5:29 and he call hi name noah, saying, thi same shall comfort
u concern our work and toil of our hands, becaus of the ground
which the lord hath cursed.

5:30 and lamech live after he begat noah five hundr nineti and five
years, and begat son and daughters: 5:31 and all the day of lamech
wer seven hundr seventi and seven years: and he died.

5:32 and noah wa five hundr year old: and noah begat shem, ham,
and japheth.

6:1 and it came to pass, when men began to multipli on the face of the
earth, and daughter were born unto them, 6:2 that the son of god saw
th daughter of men that they were fair; and they took them wive of
al which they chose.

6:3 and the lord said, My spirit shall not alway strive with man, for
that he also is flesh: yet hi day shall be an hundr and twenty
years.

6:4 there were giant in the earth in those days; and also after that,
when the son of god came in unto the daughter of men, and they bare
children to them, the same becam mighti men which were of old, men of
renown.

6:5 and god saw that the wicked of man wa great in the earth, and
that everi imagin of the thought of hi heart wa onli evil
continually.

6:6 and it repent the lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
griev him at hi heart.

6:7 and the lord said, I will destroy man whom I have creat from the
fac of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creep thing, and
th fowl of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.

6:8 but noah found grace in the eye of the lord.

6:9 these are the gener of noah: noah wa a just man and perfect
in hi generations, and noah walk with god.

6:10 and noah begat three sons, shem, ham, and japheth.

6:11 the earth also wa corrupt befor god, and the earth wa filled
with violence.

6:12 and god look upon the earth, and, behold, it wa corrupt; for
al flesh had corrupt hi way upon the earth.

6:13 and god said unto noah, the end of all flesh is come befor me;
for the earth is fill with violenc through them; and, behold, i
wil destroy them with the earth.

6:14 make thee an ark of gopher wood; room shalt thou make in the
ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.

6:15 and thi is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: the length
of the ark shall be three hundr cubits, the breadth of it fifty
cubits, and the height of it thirti cubits.

6:16 A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side
thereof; with lower, second, and third stori shalt thou make it.

6:17 and, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of water upon the
earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under
heaven; and everi thing that is in the earth shall die.

6:18 but with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come
into the ark, thou, and thi sons, and thi wife, and thi sons' wives
with thee.

6:19 and of everi live thing of all flesh, two of everi sort shalt
thou bring into the ark, to keep them aliv with thee; they shall be
mal and female.

6:20 Of fowl after their kind, and of cattl after their kind, of
everi creep thing of the earth after hi kind, two of everi sort
shal come unto thee, to keep them alive.

6:21 and take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt
gath it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

6:22 thu did noah; accord to all that god command him, so did
he.

7:1 and the lord said unto noah, come thou and all thi hous into the
ark; for thee have I seen righteou befor me in thi generation.

7:2 Of everi clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male
and hi female: and of beast that are not clean by two, the male and
hi female.

7:3 Of fowl also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to
keep seed aliv upon the face of all the earth.

7:4 for yet seven days, and I will caus it to rain upon the earth
forti day and forti nights; and everi live substanc that I have
mad will I destroy from off the face of the earth.

7:5 and noah did accord unto all that the lord command him.

7:6 and noah wa six hundr year old when the flood of water was
upon the earth.

7:7 and noah went in, and hi sons, and hi wife, and hi sons' wives
with him, into the ark, becaus of the water of the flood.

7:8 Of clean beasts, and of beast that are not clean, and of fowls,
and of everi thing that creepeth upon the earth, 7:9 there went in two
and two unto noah into the ark, the male and the female, as god had
command noah.

7:10 and it came to pass after seven days, that the water of the
flood were upon the earth.

7:11 In the six hundredth year of noah' life, in the second month,
th seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains
of the great deep broken up, and the window of heaven were opened.

7:12 and the rain wa upon the earth forti day and forti nights.

7:13 In the selfsam day enter noah, and shem, and ham, and japheth,
th son of noah, and noah' wife, and the three wive of hi sons
with them, into the ark; 7:14 they, and everi beast after hi kind,
and all the cattl after their kind, and everi creep thing that
creepeth upon the earth after hi kind, and everi fowl after hi kind,
everi bird of everi sort.

7:15 and they went in unto noah into the ark, two and two of all
flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

7:16 and they that went in, went in male and femal of all flesh, as
god had command him: and the lord shut him in.

7:17 and the flood wa forti day upon the earth; and the waters
increased, and bare up the ark, and it wa lift up abov the earth.

7:18 and the water prevailed, and were increas greatli upon the
earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

7:19 and the water prevail exceedingli upon the earth; and all the
high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.

7:20 fifteen cubit upward did the water prevail; and the mountains
wer covered.

7:21 and all flesh die that move upon the earth, both of fowl, and
of cattle, and of beast, and of everi creep thing that creepeth
upon the earth, and everi man: 7:22 all in whose nostril wa the
breath of life, of all that wa in the dri land, died.

7:23 and everi live substanc wa destroy which wa upon the face
of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creep things, and the
fowl of the heaven; and they were destroy from the earth: and noah
onli remain alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

7:24 and the water prevail upon the earth an hundr and fifty
days.

8:1 and god rememb noah, and everi live thing, and all the
cattl that wa with him in the ark: and god made a wind to pass over
th earth, and the water asswaged; 8:2 the fountain also of the deep
and the window of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was
restrained; 8:3 and the water return from off the earth
continually: and after the end of the hundr and fifti day the
wat were abated.

8:4 and the ark rest in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of
th month, upon the mountain of ararat.

8:5 and the water decreas continu until the tenth month: in the
tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the top of the
mountain seen.

8:6 and it came to pass at the end of forti days, that noah open the
window of the ark which he had made: 8:7 and he sent forth a raven,
which went forth to and fro, until the water were dri up from off
th earth.

8:8 also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the water were
ab from off the face of the ground; 8:9 but the dove found no rest
for the sole of her foot, and she return unto him into the ark, for
th water were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his
hand, and took her, and pull her in unto him into the ark.

8:10 and he stay yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the
dov out of the ark; 8:11 and the dove came in to him in the evening;
and, lo, in her mouth wa an oliv leaf pluckt off: so noah knew that
th water were abat from off the earth.

8:12 and he stay yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove;
which return not again unto him ani more.

8:13 and it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the
first month, the first day of the month, the water were dri up from
off the earth: and noah remov the cover of the ark, and looked,
and, behold, the face of the ground wa dry.

8:14 and in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
month, wa the earth dried.

8:15 and god spake unto noah, saying, 8:16 Go forth of the ark, thou,
and thi wife, and thi sons, and thi sons' wive with thee.

8:17 bring forth with thee everi live thing that is with thee, of
al flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of everi creep thing
that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantli in the
earth, and be fruitful, and multipli upon the earth.

8:18 and noah went forth, and hi sons, and hi wife, and hi sons'
wiv with him: 8:19 everi beast, everi creep thing, and every
fowl, and whatsoev creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went
forth out of the ark.

8:20 and noah build an altar unto the lord; and took of everi clean
beast, and of everi clean fowl, and offer burnt offer on the
altar.

8:21 and the lord smell a sweet savour; and the lord said in his
heart, I will not again curs the ground ani more for man' sake; for
th imagin of man' heart is evil from hi youth; neither will i
again smite ani more everi thing living, as I have done.

8:22 while the earth remaineth, seedtim and harvest, and cold and
heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

9:1 and god bless noah and hi sons, and said unto them, be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

9:2 and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon everi beast
of the earth, and upon everi fowl of the air, upon all that moveth
upon the earth, and upon all the fish of the sea; into your hand are
they delivered.

9:3 everi move thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the
green herb have I given you all things.

9:4 but flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall
y not eat.

9:5 and sure your blood of your live will I require; at the hand of
everi beast will I requir it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of
everi man' brother will I requir the life of man.

9:6 whoso sheddeth man' blood, by man shall hi blood be shed: for in
th imag of god made he man.

9:7 and you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantli in
th earth, and multipli therein.

9:8 and god spake unto noah, and to hi son with him, saying, 9:9 and
i, behold, I establish my coven with you, and with your seed after
you; 9:10 and with everi live creatur that is with you, of the
fowl, of the cattle, and of everi beast of the earth with you; from
al that go out of the ark, to everi beast of the earth.

9:11 and I will establish my coven with you, neither shall all
flesh be cut off ani more by the water of a flood; neither shall
ther ani more be a flood to destroy the earth.

9:12 and god said, thi is the token of the coven which I make
between me and you and everi live creatur that is with you, for
perpetu generations: 9:13 I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall
b for a token of a coven between me and the earth.

9:14 and it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth,
that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: 9:15 and I will rememb my
covenant, which is between me and you and everi live creatur of all
flesh; and the water shall no more becom a flood to destroy all
flesh.

9:16 and the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that
i may rememb the everlast coven between god and everi living
creatur of all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:17 and god said unto noah, thi is the token of the covenant, which
i have establish between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:18 and the son of noah, that went forth of the ark, were shem, and
ham, and japheth: and ham is the father of canaan.

9:19 these are the three son of noah: and of them wa the whole earth
overspread.

9:20 and noah began to be an husbandman, and he plant a vineyard:
9:21 and he drank of the wine, and wa drunken; and he wa uncovered
within hi tent.

9:22 and ham, the father of canaan, saw the naked of hi father,
and told hi two brethren without.

9:23 and shem and japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their
shoulders, and went backward, and cover the naked of their
father; and their face were backward, and they saw not their father's
nakedness.

9:24 and noah awok from hi wine, and knew what hi younger son had
don unto him.

9:25 and he said, curs be canaan; a servant of servant shall he be
unto hi brethren.

9:26 and he said, bless be the lord god of shem; and canaan shall be
hi servant.

9:27 god shall enlarg japheth, and he shall dwell in the tent of
shem; and canaan shall be hi servant.

9:28 and noah live after the flood three hundr and fifti years.

9:29 and all the day of noah were nine hundr and fifti years: and
h died.

10:1 now these are the gener of the son of noah, shem, ham, and
japheth: and unto them were son born after the flood.

10:2 the son of japheth; gomer, and magog, and madai, and javan, and
tubal, and meshech, and tiras.

10:3 and the son of gomer; ashkenaz, and riphath, and togarmah.

10:4 and the son of javan; elishah, and tarshish, kittim, and
dodanim.

10:5 By these were the isl of the gentil divid in their lands;
everi one after hi tongue, after their families, in their nations.

10:6 and the son of ham; cush, and mizraim, and phut, and canaan.

10:7 and the son of cush; seba, and havilah, and sabtah, and raamah,
and sabtechah: and the son of raamah; sheba, and dedan.

10:8 and cush begat nimrod: he began to be a mighti one in the earth.

10:9 He wa a mighti hunter befor the lord: wherefor it is said,
even as nimrod the mighti hunter befor the lord.

10:10 and the begin of hi kingdom wa babel, and erech, and
accad, and calneh, in the land of shinar.

10:11 out of that land went forth asshur, and build nineveh, and the
citi rehoboth, and calah, 10:12 and resen between nineveh and calah:
th same is a great city.

10:13 and mizraim begat ludim, and anamim, and lehabim, and naphtuhim,
10:14 and pathrusim, and casluhim, (out of whom came philistim,) and
caphtorim.

10:15 and canaan begat sidon hi first born, and heth, 10:16 and the
jebusite, and the amorite, and the girgasite, 10:17 and the hivite,
and the arkite, and the sinite, 10:18 and the arvadite, and the
zemarite, and the hamathite: and afterward were the famili of the
canaanit spread abroad.

10:19 and the border of the canaanit wa from sidon, as thou comest
to gerar, unto gaza; as thou goest, unto sodom, and gomorrah, and
admah, and zeboim, even unto lasha.

10:20 these are the son of ham, after their families, after their
tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.

10:21 unto shem also, the father of all the children of eber, the
broth of japheth the elder, even to him were children born.

10:22 the children of shem; elam, and asshur, and arphaxad, and lud,
and aram.

10:23 and the children of aram; uz, and hul, and gether, and mash.

10:24 and arphaxad begat salah; and salah begat eber.

10:25 and unto eber were born two sons: the name of one wa peleg; for
in hi day wa the earth divided; and hi brother' name wa joktan.

10:26 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 10:27 and hadoram, and uzal, and diklah, 10:28 and obal, and
abimael, and sheba, 10:29 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab: all these
wer the son of joktan.

10:30 and their dwell wa from mesha, as thou goest unto sephar a
mount of the east.

10:31 these are the son of shem, after their families, after their
tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

10:32 these are the famili of the son of noah, after their
generations, in their nations: and by these were the nation divided
in the earth after the flood.

11:1 and the whole earth wa of one language, and of one speech.

11:2 and it came to pass, as they journey from the east, that they
found a plain in the land of shinar; and they dwelt there.

11:3 and they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn
them thoroughly. and they had brick for stone, and slime had they for
morter.

11:4 and they said, Go to, let us build us a citi and a tower, whose
top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be
scatt abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

11:5 and the lord came down to see the citi and the tower, which the
children of men builded.

11:6 and the lord said, behold, the peopl is one, and they have all
on language; and thi they begin to do: and now noth will be
restrain from them, which they have imagin to do.

11:7 Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that
they may not understand one another' speech.

11:8 So the lord scatter them abroad from thenc upon the face of
al the earth: and they left off to build the city.

11:9 therefor is the name of it call babel; becaus the lord did
ther confound the languag of all the earth: and from thenc did the
lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

11:10 these are the gener of shem: shem wa an hundr years
old, and begat arphaxad two year after the flood: 11:11 and shem
liv after he begat arphaxad five hundr years, and begat son and
daughters.

11:12 and arphaxad live five and thirti years, and begat salah: 11:13
and arphaxad live after he begat salah four hundr and three years,
and begat son and daughters.

11:14 and salah live thirti years, and begat eber: 11:15 and salah
liv after he begat eber four hundr and three years, and begat sons
and daughters.

11:16 and eber live four and thirti years, and begat peleg: 11:17 and
eb live after he begat peleg four hundr and thirti years, and
begat son and daughters.

11:18 and peleg live thirti years, and begat reu: 11:19 and peleg
liv after he begat reu two hundr and nine years, and begat sons
and daughters.

11:20 and reu live two and thirti years, and begat serug: 11:21 and
reu live after he begat serug two hundr and seven years, and begat
son and daughters.

11:22 and serug live thirti years, and begat nahor: 11:23 and serug
liv after he begat nahor two hundr years, and begat son and
daughters.

11:24 and nahor live nine and twenti years, and begat terah: 11:25
and nahor live after he begat terah an hundr and nineteen years,
and begat son and daughters.

11:26 and terah live seventi years, and begat abram, nahor, and
haran.

11:27 now these are the gener of terah: terah begat abram,
nahor, and haran; and haran begat lot.

11:28 and haran die befor hi father terah in the land of his
nativity, in Ur of the chaldees.

11:29 and abram and nahor took them wives: the name of abram' wife
wa sarai; and the name of nahor' wife, milcah, the daughter of
haran, the father of milcah, and the father of iscah.

11:30 but sarai wa barren; she had no child.

11:31 and terah took abram hi son, and lot the son of haran hi son's
son, and sarai hi daughter in law, hi son abram' wife; and they
went forth with them from Ur of the chaldees, to go into the land of
canaan; and they came unto haran, and dwelt there.

11:32 and the day of terah were two hundr and five years: and terah
di in haran.

12:1 now the lord had said unto abram, get thee out of thi country,
and from thi kindred, and from thi father' house, unto a land that i
wil shew thee: 12:2 and I will make of thee a great nation, and i
wil bless thee, and make thi name great; and thou shalt be a
blessing: 12:3 and I will bless them that bless thee, and curs him
that curseth thee: and in thee shall all famili of the earth be
blessed.

12:4 So abram departed, as the lord had spoken unto him; and lot went
with him: and abram wa seventi and five year old when he departed
out of haran.

12:5 and abram took sarai hi wife, and lot hi brother' son, and all
their substanc that they had gathered, and the soul that they had
gotten in haran; and they went forth to go into the land of canaan;
and into the land of canaan they came.

12:6 and abram pass through the land unto the place of sichem, unto
th plain of moreh. and the canaanit wa then in the land.

12:7 and the lord appear unto abram, and said, unto thi seed will i
giv thi land: and there build he an altar unto the lord, who
appear unto him.

12:8 and he remov from thenc unto a mountain on the east of bethel,
and pitch hi tent, have bethel on the west, and hai on the east:
and there he build an altar unto the lord, and call upon the name
of the lord.

12:9 and abram journeyed, go on still toward the south.

12:10 and there wa a famin in the land: and abram went down into
egypt to sojourn there; for the famin wa grievou in the land.

12:11 and it came to pass, when he wa come near to enter into egypt,
that he said unto sarai hi wife, behold now, I know that thou art a
fair woman to look upon: 12:12 therefor it shall come to pass, when
th egyptian shall see thee, that they shall say, thi is hi wife:
and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.

12:13 say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with
m for thi sake; and my soul shall live becaus of thee.

12:14 and it came to pass, that, when abram wa come into egypt, the
egyptian beheld the woman that she wa veri fair.

12:15 the princ also of pharaoh saw her, and commend her before
pharaoh: and the woman wa taken into pharaoh' house.

12:16 and he entreat abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and
oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses,
and camels.

12:17 and the lord plagu pharaoh and hi hous with great plagues
becaus of sarai abram' wife.

12:18 and pharaoh call abram and said, what is thi that thou hast
don unto me? whi didst thou not tell me that she wa thi wife?  12:19
whi saidst thou, she is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to
wife: now therefor behold thi wife, take her, and go thi way.

12:20 and pharaoh command hi men concern him: and they sent him
away, and hi wife, and all that he had.

13:1 and abram went up out of egypt, he, and hi wife, and all that he
had, and lot with him, into the south.

13:2 and abram wa veri rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.

13:3 and he went on hi journey from the south even to bethel, unto
th place where hi tent had been at the beginning, between bethel and
hai; 13:4 unto the place of the altar, which he had make there at the
first: and there abram call on the name of the lord.

13:5 and lot also, which went with abram, had flocks, and herds, and
tents.

13:6 and the land wa not abl to bear them, that they might dwell
together: for their substanc wa great, so that they could not dwell
together.

13:7 and there wa a strife between the herdmen of abram' cattl and
th herdmen of lot' cattle: and the canaanit and the perizzite
dwel then in the land.

13:8 and abram said unto lot, let there be no strife, I pray thee,
between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thi herdmen; for we be
brethren.

13:9 Is not the whole land befor thee? separ thyself, I pray thee,
from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right;
or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.

13:10 and lot lift up hi eyes, and beheld all the plain of jordan,
that it wa well water everi where, befor the lord destroy sodom
and gomorrah, even as the garden of the lord, like the land of egypt,
a thou comest unto zoar.

13:11 then lot chose him all the plain of jordan; and lot journeyed
east: and they separ themselv the one from the other.

13:12 abram dwell in the land of canaan, and lot dwell in the
citi of the plain, and pitch hi tent toward sodom.

13:13 but the men of sodom were wick and sinner befor the lord
exceedingly.

13:14 and the lord said unto abram, after that lot wa separ from
him, lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art
northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: 13:15 for all
th land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thi seed for
ever.

13:16 and I will make thi seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a
man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thi seed also be
numbered.

13:17 arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the
breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.

13:18 then abram remov hi tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of
mamre, which is in hebron, and built there an altar unto the lord.

14:1 and it came to pass in the day of amraphel king of shinar,
arioch king of ellasar, chedorlaom king of elam, and tidal king of
nations; 14:2 that these made war with bera king of sodom, and with
birsha king of gomorrah, shinab king of admah, and shemeb king of
zeboiim, and the king of bela, which is zoar.

14:3 all these were join togeth in the vale of siddim, which is
th salt sea.

14:4 twelv year they serv chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year
they rebelled.

14:5 and in the fourteenth year came chedorlaomer, and the king that
wer with him, and smote the rephaim in ashteroth karnaim, and the
zuzim in ham, and the emin in shaveh kiriathaim, 14:6 and the
horit in their mount seir, unto elparan, which is by the wilderness.

14:7 and they returned, and came to enmishpat, which is kadesh, and
smot all the countri of the amalekites, and also the amorites, that
dwelt in hazezontamar.

14:8 and there went out the king of sodom, and the king of gomorrah,
and the king of admah, and the king of zeboiim, and the king of bela
(th same is zoar;) and they join battl with them in the vale of
siddim; 14:9 with chedorlaom the king of elam, and with tidal king
of nations, and amraphel king of shinar, and arioch king of ellasar;
four king with five.

14:10 and the vale of siddim wa full of slimepits; and the king of
sodom and gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remain fled
to the mountain.

14:11 and they took all the good of sodom and gomorrah, and all their
victuals, and went their way.

14:12 and they took lot, abram' brother' son, who dwelt in sodom,
and hi goods, and departed.

14:13 and there came one that had escaped, and told abram the hebrew;
for he dwelt in the plain of mamr the amorite, brother of eshcol, and
broth of aner: and these were confeder with abram.

14:14 and when abram heard that hi brother wa taken captive, he
arm hi train servants, born in hi own house, three hundr and
eighteen, and pursu them unto dan.

14:15 and he divid himself against them, he and hi servants, by
night, and smote them, and pursu them unto hobah, which is on the
left hand of damascus.

14:16 and he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his
broth lot, and hi goods, and the women also, and the people.

14:17 and the king of sodom went out to meet him after hi return from
th slaughter of chedorlaomer, and of the king that were with him, at
th valley of shaveh, which is the king' dale.

14:18 and melchizedek king of salem brought forth bread and wine: and
h wa the priest of the most high god.

14:19 and he bless him, and said, bless be abram of the most high
god, possessor of heaven and earth: 14:20 and bless be the most high
god, which hath deliv thine enemi into thi hand. and he gave him
tith of all.

14:21 and the king of sodom said unto abram, give me the persons, and
tak the good to thyself.

14:22 and abram said to the king of sodom, I have lift up mine hand
unto the lord, the most high god, the possessor of heaven and earth,
14:23 that I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and
that I will not take ani thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say,
i have made abram rich: 14:24 save onli that which the young men have
eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, aner, eshcol,
and mamre; let them take their portion.

15:1 after these thing the word of the lord came unto abram in a
vision, saying, fear not, abram: I am thi shield, and thi exceeding
great reward.

15:2 and abram said, lord god, what wilt thou give me, see I go
childless, and the steward of my hous is thi eliez of damascus?
15:3 and abram said, behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo,
on born in my hous is mine heir.

15:4 and, behold, the word of the lord came unto him, saying, this
shal not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own
bowel shall be thine heir.

15:5 and he brought him forth abroad, and said, look now toward
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be abl to number them: and he
said unto him, So shall thi seed be.

15:6 and he believ in the lord; and he count it to him for
righteousness.

15:7 and he said unto him, I am the lord that brought thee out of ur
of the chaldees, to give thee thi land to inherit it.

15:8 and he said, lord god, wherebi shall I know that I shall inherit
it?  15:9 and he said unto him, take me an heifer of three year old,
and a she goat of three year old, and a ram of three year old, and a
turtledove, and a young pigeon.

15:10 and he took unto him all these, and divid them in the midst,
and laid each piec one against another: but the bird divid he not.

15:11 and when the fowl came down upon the carcases, abram drove them
away.

15:12 and when the sun wa go down, a deep sleep fell upon abram;
and, lo, an horror of great dark fell upon him.

15:13 and he said unto abram, know of a sureti that thi seed shall be
a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shall serv them; and
they shall afflict them four hundr years; 15:14 and also that
nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they
com out with great substance.

15:15 and thou shalt go to thi father in peace; thou shalt be buried
in a good old age.

15:16 but in the fourth gener they shall come hither again: for
th iniqu of the amorit is not yet full.

15:17 and it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was
dark, behold a smoke furnace, and a burn lamp that pass between
thos pieces.

15:18 In the same day the lord made a coven with abram, saying,
unto thi seed have I given thi land, from the river of egypt unto the
great river, the river euphrates: 15:19 the kenites, and the
kenizzites, and the kadmonites, 15:20 and the hittites, and the
perizzites, and the rephaims, 15:21 and the amorites, and the
canaanites, and the girgashites, and the jebusites.

16:1 now sarai abram' wife bare him no children: and she had an
handmaid, an egyptian, whose name wa hagar.

16:2 and sarai said unto abram, behold now, the lord hath restrained
m from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may
obtain children by her. and abram hearken to the voic of sarai.

16:3 and sarai abram' wife took hagar her maid the egyptian, after
abram had dwelt ten year in the land of canaan, and gave her to her
husband abram to be hi wife.

16:4 and he went in unto hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw
that she had conceived, her mistress wa despis in her eyes.

16:5 and sarai said unto abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my
maid into thi bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was
despis in her eyes: the lord judg between me and thee.

16:6 but abram said unto sarai, behold, thi maid is in thine hand; do
to her as it pleaseth thee. and when sarai dealt hardli with her, she
fl from her face.

16:7 and the angel of the lord found her by a fountain of water in the
wilderness, by the fountain in the way to shur.

16:8 and he said, hagar, sarai' maid, whenc camest thou? and whither
wilt thou go? and she said, I flee from the face of my mistress sarai.

16:9 and the angel of the lord said unto her, return to thi mistress,
and submit thyself under her hands.

16:10 and the angel of the lord said unto her, I will multipli thy
se exceedingly, that it shall not be number for multitude.

16:11 and the angel of the lord said unto her, behold, thou art with
child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call hi name ishmael; because
th lord hath heard thi affliction.

16:12 and he will be a wild man; hi hand will be against everi man,
and everi man' hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence
of all hi brethren.

16:13 and she call the name of the lord that spake unto her, thou
god seest me: for she said, have I also here look after him that
seeth me?  16:14 wherefor the well wa call beerlahairoi; behold,
it is between kadesh and bered.

16:15 and hagar bare abram a son: and abram call hi son' name,
which hagar bare, ishmael.

16:16 and abram wa fourscor and six year old, when hagar bare
ishmael to abram.

17:1 and when abram wa nineti year old and nine, the lord appeared
to abram, and said unto him, I am the almighti god; walk befor me,
and be thou perfect.

17:2 and I will make my coven between me and thee, and will
multipli thee exceedingly.

17:3 and abram fell on hi face: and god talk with him, saying, 17:4
a for me, behold, my coven is with thee, and thou shalt be a
fath of mani nations.

17:5 neither shall thi name ani more be call abram, but thi name
shal be abraham; for a father of mani nation have I made thee.

17:6 and I will make thee exceed fruitful, and I will make nations
of thee, and king shall come out of thee.

17:7 and I will establish my coven between me and thee and thi seed
aft thee in their gener for an everlast covenant, to be a
god unto thee, and to thi seed after thee.

17:8 and I will give unto thee, and to thi seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of canaan, for an
everlast possession; and I will be their god.

17:9 and god said unto abraham, thou shalt keep my coven therefore,
thou, and thi seed after thee in their generations.

17:10 thi is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and
thi seed after thee; everi man child among you shall be circumcised.

17:11 and ye shall circumcis the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall
b a token of the coven betwixt me and you.

17:12 and he that is eight day old shall be circumcis among you,
everi man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or
bought with money of ani stranger, which is not of thi seed.

17:13 He that is born in thi house, and he that is bought with thy
money, must need be circumcised: and my coven shall be in your
flesh for an everlast covenant.

17:14 and the uncircumcis man child whose flesh of hi foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from hi people; he hath
broken my covenant.

17:15 and god said unto abraham, As for sarai thi wife, thou shalt not
cal her name sarai, but sarah shall her name be.

17:16 and I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, i
wil bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; king of people
shal be of her.

17:17 then abraham fell upon hi face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, shall a child be born unto him that is an hundr year old?
and shall sarah, that is nineti year old, bear?  17:18 and abraham
said unto god, O that ishmael might live befor thee!  17:19 and god
said, sarah thi wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call
hi name isaac: and I will establish my coven with him for an
everlast covenant, and with hi seed after him.

17:20 and as for ishmael, I have heard thee: behold, I have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multipli him exceedingly;
twelv princ shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.

17:21 but my coven will I establish with isaac, which sarah shall
bear unto thee at thi set time in the next year.

17:22 and he left off talk with him, and god went up from abraham.

17:23 and abraham took ishmael hi son, and all that were born in his
house, and all that were bought with hi money, everi male among the
men of abraham' house; and circumcis the flesh of their foreskin in
th selfsam day, as god had said unto him.

17:24 and abraham wa nineti year old and nine, when he was
circumcis in the flesh of hi foreskin.

17:25 and ishmael hi son wa thirteen year old, when he was
circumcis in the flesh of hi foreskin.

17:26 In the selfsam day wa abraham circumcised, and ishmael his
son.

17:27 and all the men of hi house, born in the house, and bought with
money of the stranger, were circumcis with him.

18:1 and the lord appear unto him in the plain of mamre: and he sat
in the tent door in the heat of the day; 18:2 and he lift up hi eyes
and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he
ran to meet them from the tent door, and bow himself toward the
ground, 18:3 and said, My lord, if now I have found favour in thy
sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thi servant: 18:4 let a little
water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves
und the tree: 18:5 and I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort
y your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefor are ye come
to your servant. and they said, So do, as thou hast said.

18:6 and abraham hasten into the tent unto sarah, and said, make
readi quickli three measur of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes
upon the hearth.

18:7 and abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good,
and gave it unto a young man; and he hast to dress it.

18:8 and he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed,
and set it befor them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they
did eat.

18:9 and they said unto him, where is sarah thi wife? and he said,
behold, in the tent.

18:10 and he said, I will certainli return unto thee accord to the
tim of life; and, lo, sarah thi wife shall have a son. and sarah
heard it in the tent door, which wa behind him.

18:11 now abraham and sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it
ceas to be with sarah after the manner of women.

18:12 therefor sarah laugh within herself, saying, after I am waxed
old shall I have pleasure, my lord be old also?  18:13 and the lord
said unto abraham, wherefor did sarah laugh, saying, shall I of a
sureti bear a child, which am old?  18:14 Is ani thing too hard for
th lord? At the time appoint I will return unto thee, accord to
th time of life, and sarah shall have a son.

18:15 then sarah denied, saying, I laugh not; for she wa afraid.
and he said, nay; but thou didst laugh.

18:16 and the men rose up from thence, and look toward sodom: and
abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

18:17 and the lord said, shall I hide from abraham that thing which i
do; 18:18 see that abraham shall sure becom a great and mighty
nation, and all the nation of the earth shall be bless in him?
18:19 for I know him, that he will command hi children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the lord, to do
justic and judgment; that the lord may bring upon abraham that which
h hath spoken of him.

18:20 and the lord said, becaus the cri of sodom and gomorrah is
great, and becaus their sin is veri grievous; 18:21 I will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogeth accord to the cri of
it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.

18:22 and the men turn their face from thence, and went toward
sodom: but abraham stood yet befor the lord.

18:23 and abraham drew near, and said, wilt thou also destroy the
right with the wicked?  18:24 peradventur there be fifty
right within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the
plac for the fifti righteou that are therein?  18:25 that be far
from thee to do after thi manner, to slay the righteou with the
wicked: and that the righteou should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee: shall not the judg of all the earth do right?  18:26 and
th lord said, If I find in sodom fifti righteou within the city,
then I will spare all the place for their sakes.

18:27 and abraham answer and said, behold now, I have taken upon me
to speak unto the lord, which am but dust and ashes: 18:28
peradventur there shall lack five of the fifti righteous: wilt thou
destroy all the citi for lack of five? and he said, If I find there
forti and five, I will not destroy it.

18:29 and he spake unto him yet again, and said, peradventur there
shal be forti found there. and he said, I will not do it for forty's
sake.

18:30 and he said unto him, Oh let not the lord be angry, and I will
speak: peradventur there shall thirti be found there. and he said, i
wil not do it, if I find thirti there.

18:31 and he said, behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
lord: peradventur there shall be twenti found there. and he said, i
wil not destroy it for twenty' sake.

18:32 and he said, Oh let not the lord be angry, and I will speak yet
but thi once: peradventur ten shall be found there. and he said, i
wil not destroy it for ten' sake.

18:33 and the lord went hi way, as soon as he had left commun with
abraham: and abraham return unto hi place.

19:1 and there came two angel to sodom at even; and lot sat in the
gat of sodom: and lot see them rose up to meet them; and he bowed
himself with hi face toward the ground; 19:2 and he said, behold now,
mi lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant' house, and tarry
al night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on
your ways. and they said, nay; but we will abid in the street all
night.

19:3 and he press upon them greatly; and they turn in unto him,
and enter into hi house; and he made them a feast, and did bake
unleaven bread, and they did eat.

19:4 but befor they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of
sodom, compass the hous round, both old and young, all the people
from everi quarter: 19:5 and they call unto lot, and said unto him,
wher are the men which came in to thee thi night? bring them out
unto us, that we may know them.

19:6 and lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after
him, 19:7 and said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.

19:8 behold now, I have two daughter which have not known man; let
me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good
in your eyes: onli unto these men do nothing; for therefor came they
und the shadow of my roof.

19:9 and they said, stand back. and they said again, thi one fellow
cam in to sojourn, and he will need be a judge: now will we deal
wors with thee, than with them. and they press sore upon the man,
even lot, and came near to break the door.

19:10 but the men put forth their hand, and pull lot into the house
to them, and shut to the door.

19:11 and they smote the men that were at the door of the hous with
blindness, both small and great: so that they weari themselv to
find the door.

19:12 and the men said unto lot, hast thou here ani besides? son in
law, and thi sons, and thi daughters, and whatsoev thou hast in the
city, bring them out of thi place: 19:13 for we will destroy this
place, becaus the cri of them is waxen great befor the face of the
lord; and the lord hath sent us to destroy it.

19:14 and lot went out, and spake unto hi son in law, which married
hi daughters, and said, up, get you out of thi place; for the lord
wil destroy thi city. but he seem as one that mock unto hi sons
in law.

19:15 and when the morn arose, then the angel hasten lot,
saying, arise, take thi wife, and thi two daughters, which are here;
lest thou be consum in the iniqu of the city.

19:16 and while he lingered, the men laid hold upon hi hand, and upon
th hand of hi wife, and upon the hand of hi two daughters; the lord
b merci unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him
without the city.

19:17 and it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad,
that he said, escap for thi life; look not behind thee, neither stay
thou in all the plain; escap to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

19:18 and lot said unto them, oh, not so, my lord: 19:19 behold now,
thi servant hath found grace in thi sight, and thou hast magnifi thy
mercy, which thou hast shew unto me in save my life; and I cannot
escap to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die: 19:20
behold now, thi citi is near to flee unto, and it is a littl one:
oh, let me escap thither, (i it not a littl one?) and my soul shall
live.

19:21 and he said unto him, see, I have accept thee concern this
th also, that I will not overthrow thi city, for the which thou
hast spoken.

19:22 hast thee, escap thither; for I cannot do anyth till thou
b come thither. therefor the name of the citi wa call zoar.

19:23 the sun wa risen upon the earth when lot enter into zoar.

19:24 then the lord rain upon sodom and upon gomorrah brimston and
fir from the lord out of heaven; 19:25 and he overthrew those cities,
and all the plain, and all the inhabit of the cities, and that
which grew upon the ground.

19:26 but hi wife look back from behind him, and she becam a
pillar of salt.

19:27 and abraham gat up earli in the morn to the place where he
stood befor the lord: 19:28 and he look toward sodom and gomorrah,
and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke
of the countri went up as the smoke of a furnace.

19:29 and it came to pass, when god destroy the citi of the plain,
that god rememb abraham, and sent lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when he overthrew the citi in the which lot dwelt.

19:30 and lot went up out of zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his
two daughter with him; for he fear to dwell in zoar: and he dwelt
in a cave, he and hi two daughters.

19:31 and the firstborn said unto the younger, our father is old, and
ther is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of
al the earth: 19:32 come, let us make our father drink wine, and we
wil lie with him, that we may preserv seed of our father.

19:33 and they made their father drink wine that night: and the
firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceiv not when
sh lay down, nor when she arose.

19:34 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto
th younger, behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him
drink wine thi night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we
may preserv seed of our father.

19:35 and they made their father drink wine that night also: and the
young arose, and lay with him; and he perceiv not when she lay
down, nor when she arose.

19:36 thu were both the daughter of lot with child by their father.

19:37 and the first born bare a son, and call hi name moab: the
sam is the father of the moabit unto thi day.

19:38 and the younger, she also bare a son, and call hi name
benammi: the same is the father of the children of ammon unto this
day.

20:1 and abraham journey from thenc toward the south country, and
dwel between kadesh and shur, and sojourn in gerar.

20:2 and abraham said of sarah hi wife, she is my sister: and
abimelech king of gerar sent, and took sarah.

20:3 but god came to abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken;
for she is a man' wife.

20:4 but abimelech had not come near her: and he said, lord, wilt thou
slay also a righteou nation?  20:5 said he not unto me, she is my
sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the
integr of my heart and innoc of my hand have I done this.

20:6 and god said unto him in a dream, yea, I know that thou didst
thi in the integr of thi heart; for I also withheld thee from
sin against me: therefor suffer I thee not to touch her.

20:7 now therefor restor the man hi wife; for he is a prophet, and
h shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restor her
not, know thou that thou shalt sure die, thou, and all that are
thine.

20:8 therefor abimelech rose earli in the morning, and call all his
servants, and told all these thing in their ears: and the men were
sor afraid.

20:9 then abimelech call abraham, and said unto him, what hast thou
don unto us? and what have I offend thee, that thou hast brought on
m and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deed unto me that
ought not to be done.

20:10 and abimelech said unto abraham, what sawest thou, that thou
hast done thi thing?  20:11 and abraham said, becaus I thought,
sur the fear of god is not in thi place; and they will slay me for
mi wife' sake.

20:12 and yet inde she is my sister; she is the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she becam my wife.

20:13 and it came to pass, when god caus me to wander from my
father' house, that I said unto her, thi is thi kind which thou
shalt shew unto me; at everi place whither we shall come, say of me,
h is my brother.

20:14 and abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
womenservants, and gave them unto abraham, and restor him sarah his
wife.

20:15 and abimelech said, behold, my land is befor thee: dwell where
it pleaseth thee.

20:16 and unto sarah he said, behold, I have given thi brother a
thousand piec of silver: behold, he is to thee a cover of the
eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thu she was
reproved.

20:17 So abraham pray unto god: and god heal abimelech, and his
wife, and hi maidservants; and they bare children.

20:18 for the lord had fast close up all the womb of the hous of
abimelech, becaus of sarah abraham' wife.

21:1 and the lord visit sarah as he had said, and the lord did unto
sarah as he had spoken.

21:2 for sarah conceived, and bare abraham a son in hi old age, at
th set time of which god had spoken to him.

21:3 and abraham call the name of hi son that wa born unto him,
whom sarah bare to him, isaac.

21:4 and abraham circumcis hi son isaac be eight day old, as
god had command him.

21:5 and abraham wa an hundr year old, when hi son isaac wa born
unto him.

21:6 and sarah said, god hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear
wil laugh with me.

21:7 and she said, who would have said unto abraham, that sarah should
hav given children suck? for I have born him a son in hi old age.

21:8 and the child grew, and wa weaned: and abraham made a great
feast the same day that isaac wa weaned.

21:9 and sarah saw the son of hagar the egyptian, which she had born
unto abraham, mocking.

21:10 wherefor she said unto abraham, cast out thi bondwoman and her
son: for the son of thi bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even
with isaac.

21:11 and the thing wa veri grievou in abraham' sight becaus of
hi son.

21:12 and god said unto abraham, let it not be grievou in thi sight
becaus of the lad, and becaus of thi bondwoman; in all that sarah
hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in isaac shall thy
se be called.

21:13 and also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation,
becaus he is thi seed.

21:14 and abraham rose up earli in the morning, and took bread, and a
bottl of water, and gave it unto hagar, put it on her shoulder,
and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wander in
th wilder of beersheba.

21:15 and the water wa spent in the bottle, and she cast the child
und one of the shrubs.

21:16 and she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off,
a it were a bow shot: for she said, let me not see the death of the
child. and she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.

21:17 and god heard the voic of the lad; and the angel of god called
to hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, what aileth thee, hagar?
fear not; for god hath heard the voic of the lad where he is.

21:18 arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will
mak him a great nation.

21:19 and god open her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she
went, and fill the bottl with water, and gave the lad drink.

21:20 and god wa with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and becam an archer.

21:21 and he dwelt in the wilder of paran: and hi mother took him
a wife out of the land of egypt.

21:22 and it came to pass at that time, that abimelech and phichol the
chief captain of hi host spake unto abraham, saying, god is with thee
in all that thou doest: 21:23 now therefor swear unto me here by god
that thou wilt not deal fals with me, nor with my son, nor with my
son' son: but accord to the kind that I have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

21:24 and abraham said, I will swear.

21:25 and abraham reprov abimelech becaus of a well of water, which
abimelech' servant had violent taken away.

21:26 and abimelech said, I wot not who hath done thi thing; neither
didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.

21:27 and abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto abimelech;
and both of them made a covenant.

21:28 and abraham set seven ewe lamb of the flock by themselves.

21:29 and abimelech said unto abraham, what mean these seven ewe lambs
which thou hast set by themselves?  21:30 and he said, for these seven
ew lamb shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a wit unto
me, that I have dig thi well.

21:31 wherefor he call that place beersheba; becaus there they
swar both of them.

21:32 thu they made a coven at beersheba: then abimelech rose up,
and phichol the chief captain of hi host, and they return into the
land of the philistines.

21:33 and abraham plant a grove in beersheba, and call there on
th name of the lord, the everlast god.

21:34 and abraham sojourn in the philistines' land mani days.

22:1 and it came to pass after these things, that god did tempt
abraham, and said unto him, abraham: and he said, behold, here I am.

22:2 and he said, take now thi son, thine onli son isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of moriah; and offer him there for
a burnt offer upon one of the mountain which I will tell thee of.

22:3 and abraham rose up earli in the morning, and saddl hi ass,
and took two of hi young men with him, and isaac hi son, and clave
th wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place
of which god had told him.

22:4 then on the third day abraham lift up hi eyes, and saw the
plac afar off.

22:5 and abraham said unto hi young men, abid ye here with the ass;
and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

22:6 and abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
isaac hi son; and he took the fire in hi hand, and a knife; and they
went both of them together.

22:7 and isaac spake unto abraham hi father, and said, My father: and
h said, here am I, my son. and he said, behold the fire and the wood:
but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?  22:8 and abraham said, my
son, god will provid himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.

22:9 and they came to the place which god had told him of; and abraham
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound isaac his
son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

22:10 and abraham stretch forth hi hand, and took the knife to slay
hi son.

22:11 and the angel of the lord call unto him out of heaven, and
said, abraham, abraham: and he said, here am i.

22:12 and he said, lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou
ani thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest god, see thou
hast not withheld thi son, thine onli son from me.

22:13 and abraham lift up hi eyes, and looked, and behold behind
him a ram caught in a thicket by hi horns: and abraham went and took
th ram, and offer him up for a burnt offer in the stead of his
son.

22:14 and abraham call the name of that place jehovahjireh: as it is
said to thi day, In the mount of the lord it shall be seen.

22:15 and the angel of the lord call unto abraham out of heaven the
second time, 22:16 and said, By myself have I sworn, saith the lord,
for becaus thou hast done thi thing, and hast not withheld thi son,
thin onli son: 22:17 that in bless I will bless thee, and in
multipli I will multipli thi seed as the star of the heaven, and
a the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thi seed shall possess
th gate of hi enemies; 22:18 and in thi seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed; becaus thou hast obey my voice.

22:19 So abraham return unto hi young men, and they rose up and
went togeth to beersheba; and abraham dwelt at beersheba.

22:20 and it came to pass after these things, that it wa told
abraham, saying, behold, milcah, she hath also born children unto thy
broth nahor; 22:21 huz hi firstborn, and buz hi brother, and
kemuel the father of aram, 22:22 and chesed, and hazo, and pildash,
and jidlaph, and bethuel.

22:23 and bethuel begat rebekah: these eight milcah did bear to nahor,
abraham' brother.

22:24 and hi concubine, whose name wa reumah, she bare also tebah,
and gaham, and thahash, and maachah.

23:1 and sarah wa an hundr and seven and twenti year old: these
wer the year of the life of sarah.

23:2 and sarah die in kirjatharba; the same is hebron in the land of
canaan: and abraham came to mourn for sarah, and to weep for her.

23:3 and abraham stood up from befor hi dead, and spake unto the
son of heth, saying, 23:4 I am a stranger and a sojourn with you:
giv me a possess of a buryingplac with you, that I may buri my
dead out of my sight.

23:5 and the children of heth answer abraham, say unto him, 23:6
hear us, my lord: thou art a mighti princ among us: in the choic of
our sepulchr buri thi dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his
sepulchre, but that thou mayest buri thi dead.

23:7 and abraham stood up, and bow himself to the peopl of the
land, even to the children of heth.

23:8 and he commun with them, saying, If it be your mind that i
should buri my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to
ephron the son of zohar, 23:9 that he may give me the cave of
machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of hi field; for as
much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possess of a
buryingplac amongst you.

23:10 and ephron dwelt among the children of heth: and ephron the
hittit answer abraham in the audienc of the children of heth, even
of all that went in at the gate of hi city, saying, 23:11 nay, my
lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, i
giv it thee; in the presenc of the son of my peopl give I it thee:
buri thi dead.

23:12 and abraham bow down himself befor the peopl of the land.

23:13 and he spake unto ephron in the audienc of the peopl of the
land, saying, but if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will
giv thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will buri my dead
there.

23:14 and ephron answer abraham, say unto him, 23:15 My lord,
hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundr shekel of silver;
what is that betwixt me and thee? buri therefor thi dead.

23:16 and abraham hearken unto ephron; and abraham weigh to ephron
th silver, which he had name in the audienc of the son of heth,
four hundr shekel of silver, current money with the merchant.

23:17 and the field of ephron which wa in machpelah, which wa before
mamre, the field, and the cave which wa therein, and all the trees
that were in the field, that were in all the border round about, were
mad sure 23:18 unto abraham for a possess in the presenc of the
children of heth, befor all that went in at the gate of hi city.

23:19 and after this, abraham buri sarah hi wife in the cave of the
field of machpelah befor mamre: the same is hebron in the land of
canaan.

23:20 and the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto
abraham for a possess of a buryingplac by the son of heth.

24:1 and abraham wa old, and well stricken in age: and the lord had
bless abraham in all things.

24:2 and abraham said unto hi eldest servant of hi house, that ruled
ov all that he had, put, I pray thee, thi hand under my thigh: 24:3
and I will make thee swear by the lord, the god of heaven, and the god
of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the
daught of the canaanites, among whom I dwell: 24:4 but thou shalt
go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son
isaac.

24:5 and the servant said unto him, peradventur the woman will not be
wil to follow me unto thi land: must I need bring thi son again
unto the land from whenc thou camest?  24:6 and abraham said unto
him, bewar thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

24:7 the lord god of heaven, which took me from my father' house, and
from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware
unto me, saying, unto thi seed will I give thi land; he shall send
hi angel befor thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from
thence.

24:8 and if the woman will not be will to follow thee, then thou
shalt be clear from thi my oath: onli bring not my son thither again.

24:9 and the servant put hi hand under the thigh of abraham his
master, and sware to him concern that matter.

24:10 and the servant took ten camel of the camel of hi master, and
departed; for all the good of hi master were in hi hand: and he
arose, and went to mesopotamia, unto the citi of nahor.

24:11 and he made hi camel to kneel down without the citi by a well
of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out
to draw water.

24:12 and he said O lord god of my master abraham, I pray thee, send
m good speed thi day, and shew kind unto my master abraham.

24:13 behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughter of
th men of the citi come out to draw water: 24:14 and let it come to
pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, let down thi pitcher, i
pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, drink, and I will give
thi camel drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed
for thi servant isaac; and therebi shall I know that thou hast shewed
kind unto my master.

24:15 and it came to pass, befor he had done speaking, that, behold,
rebekah came out, who wa born to bethuel, son of milcah, the wife of
nahor, abraham' brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

24:16 and the damsel wa veri fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had
ani man known her: and she went down to the well, and fill her
pitcher, and came up.

24:17 and the servant ran to meet her, and said, let me, I pray thee,
drink a littl water of thi pitcher.

24:18 and she said, drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her
pitch upon her hand, and gave him drink.

24:19 and when she had done give him drink, she said, I will draw
wat for thi camel also, until they have done drinking.

24:20 and she hasted, and empti her pitcher into the trough, and ran
again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all hi camels.

24:21 and the man wonder at her held hi peace, to wit whether the
lord had made hi journey prosper or not.

24:22 and it came to pass, as the camel had done drinking, that the
man took a golden ear of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets
for her hand of ten shekel weight of gold; 24:23 and said, whose
daught art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thi father's
hous for us to lodg in?  24:24 and she said unto him, I am the
daught of bethuel the son of milcah, which she bare unto nahor.

24:25 she said moreov unto him, We have both straw and provender
enough, and room to lodg in.

24:26 and the man bow down hi head, and worship the lord.

24:27 and he said, bless be the lord god of my master abraham, who
hath not left destitut my master of hi merci and hi truth: I being
in the way, the lord led me to the hous of my master' brethren.

24:28 and the damsel ran, and told them of her mother' hous these
things.

24:29 and rebekah had a brother, and hi name wa laban: and laban ran
out unto the man, unto the well.

24:30 and it came to pass, when he saw the ear and bracelet upon
hi sister' hands, and when he heard the word of rebekah hi sister,
saying, thu spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and,
behold, he stood by the camel at the well.

24:31 and he said, come in, thou bless of the lord; wherefore
standest thou without? for I have prepar the house, and room for the
camels.

24:32 and the man came into the house: and he ungird hi camels, and
gav straw and provend for the camels, and water to wash hi feet,
and the men' feet that were with him.

24:33 and there wa set meat befor him to eat: but he said, I will
not eat, until I have told mine errand. and he said, speak on.

24:34 and he said, I am abraham' servant.

24:35 and the lord hath bless my master greatly; and he is become
great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold,
and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

24:36 and sarah my master' wife bare a son to my master when she was
old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

24:37 and my master made me swear, saying, thou shalt not take a wife
to my son of the daughter of the canaanites, in whose land I dwell:
24:38 but thou shalt go unto my father' house, and to my kindred, and
tak a wife unto my son.

24:39 and I said unto my master, peradventur the woman will not
follow me.

24:40 and he said unto me, the lord, befor whom I walk, will send his
angel with thee, and prosper thi way; and thou shalt take a wife for
mi son of my kindred, and of my father' house: 24:41 then shalt thou
b clear from thi my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if
they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

24:42 and I came thi day unto the well, and said, O lord god of my
mast abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go: 24:43
behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that
when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, give me,
i pray thee, a littl water of thi pitcher to drink; 24:44 and she say
to me, both drink thou, and I will also draw for thi camels: let the
sam be the woman whom the lord hath appoint out for my master's
son.

24:45 and befor I had done speak in mine heart, behold, rebekah
cam forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto
th well, and drew water: and I said unto her, let me drink, I pray
thee.

24:46 and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, drink, and I will give thi camel drink also: so I drank,
and she made the camel drink also.

24:47 and I ask her, and said, whose daughter art thou? and she
said, the daughter of bethuel, nahor' son, whom milcah bare unto him:
and I put the ear upon her face, and the bracelet upon her hands.

24:48 and I bow down my head, and worship the lord, and blessed
th lord god of my master abraham, which had led me in the right way
to take my master' brother' daughter unto hi son.

24:49 and now if ye will deal kindli and truli with my master, tell
me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the
left.

24:50 then laban and bethuel answer and said, the thing proceedeth
from the lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

24:51 behold, rebekah is befor thee, take her, and go, and let her be
thi master' son' wife, as the lord hath spoken.

24:52 and it came to pass, that, when abraham' servant heard their
words, he worship the lord, bow himself to the earth.

24:53 and the servant brought forth jewel of silver, and jewel of
gold, and raiment, and gave them to rebekah: he gave also to her
broth and to her mother preciou things.

24:54 and they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him,
and tarri all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said,
send me away unto my master.

24:55 and her brother and her mother said, let the damsel abid with
u a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

24:56 and he said unto them, hinder me not, see the lord hath
prosp my way; send me away that I may go to my master.

24:57 and they said, We will call the damsel, and enquir at her
mouth.

24:58 and they call rebekah, and said unto her, wilt thou go with
thi man? and she said, I will go.

24:59 and they sent away rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
abraham' servant, and hi men.

24:60 and they bless rebekah, and said unto her, thou art our
sister, be thou the mother of thousand of millions, and let thi seed
possess the gate of those which hate them.

24:61 and rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the
camels, and follow the man: and the servant took rebekah, and went
hi way.

24:62 and isaac came from the way of the well lahairoi; for he dwelt
in the south country.

24:63 and isaac went out to medit in the field at the eventide: and
h lift up hi eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camel were coming.

24:64 and rebekah lift up her eyes, and when she saw isaac, she
light off the camel.

24:65 for she had said unto the servant, what man is thi that walketh
in the field to meet us? and the servant had said, It is my master:
therefor she took a vail, and cover herself.

24:66 and the servant told isaac all thing that he had done.

24:67 and isaac brought her into hi mother sarah' tent, and took
rebekah, and she becam hi wife; and he love her: and isaac was
comfort after hi mother' death.

25:1 then again abraham took a wife, and her name wa keturah.

25:2 and she bare him zimran, and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and
ishbak, and shuah.

25:3 and jokshan begat sheba, and dedan. and the son of dedan were
asshurim, and letushim, and leummim.

25:4 and the son of midian; ephah, and epher, and hanoch, and abidah,
and eldaah. all these were the children of keturah.

25:5 and abraham gave all that he had unto isaac.

25:6 but unto the son of the concubines, which abraham had, abraham
gav gifts, and sent them away from isaac hi son, while he yet lived,
eastward, unto the east country.

25:7 and these are the day of the year of abraham' life which he
lived, an hundr threescor and fifteen years.

25:8 then abraham gave up the ghost, and die in a good old age, an
old man, and full of years; and wa gather to hi people.

25:9 and hi son isaac and ishmael buri him in the cave of
machpelah, in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite, which
i befor mamre; 25:10 the field which abraham purchas of the sons
of heth: there wa abraham buried, and sarah hi wife.

25:11 and it came to pass after the death of abraham, that god blessed
hi son isaac; and isaac dwelt by the well lahairoi.

25:12 now these are the gener of ishmael, abraham' son, whom
hagar the egyptian, sarah' handmaid, bare unto abraham: 25:13 and
thes are the name of the son of ishmael, by their names, according
to their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebajoth; and kedar,
and adbeel, and mibsam, 25:14 and mishma, and dumah, and massa, 25:15
hadar, and tema, jetur, naphish, and kedemah: 25:16 these are the sons
of ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their
castles; twelv princ accord to their nations.

25:17 and these are the year of the life of ishmael, an hundr and
thirti and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was
gath unto hi people.

25:18 and they dwelt from havilah unto shur, that is befor egypt, as
thou goest toward assyria: and he die in the presenc of all his
brethren.

25:19 and these are the gener of isaac, abraham' son: abraham
begat isaac: 25:20 and isaac wa forti year old when he took rebekah
to wife, the daughter of bethuel the syrian of padanaram, the sister
to laban the syrian.

25:21 and isaac intreat the lord for hi wife, becaus she was
barren: and the lord wa intreat of him, and rebekah hi wife
conceived.

25:22 and the children struggl togeth within her; and she said, if
it be so, whi am I thus? and she went to enquir of the lord.

25:23 and the lord said unto her, two nation are in thi womb, and two
mann of peopl shall be separ from thi bowels; and the one
peopl shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall
serv the younger.

25:24 and when her day to be deliv were fulfilled, behold, there
wer twin in her womb.

25:25 and the first came out red, all over like an hairi garment; and
they call hi name esau.

25:26 and after that came hi brother out, and hi hand took hold on
esau' heel; and hi name wa call jacob: and isaac wa threescore
year old when she bare them.

25:27 and the boy grew: and esau wa a cun hunter, a man of the
field; and jacob wa a plain man, dwell in tents.

25:28 and isaac love esau, becaus he did eat of hi venison: but
rebekah love jacob.

25:29 and jacob sod pottage: and esau came from the field, and he was
faint: 25:30 and esau said to jacob, feed me, I pray thee, with that
sam red pottage; for I am faint: therefor wa hi name call edom.

25:31 and jacob said, sell me thi day thi birthright.

25:32 and esau said, behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit
shal thi birthright do to me?  25:33 and jacob said, swear to me
thi day; and he sware unto him: and he sold hi birthright unto
jacob.

25:34 then jacob gave esau bread and pottag of lentiles; and he did
eat and drink, and rose up, and went hi way: thu esau despis his
birthright.

26:1 and there wa a famin in the land, besid the first famin that
wa in the day of abraham. and isaac went unto abimelech king of the
philistin unto gerar.

26:2 and the lord appear unto him, and said, Go not down into egypt;
dwel in the land which I shall tell thee of: 26:3 sojourn in this
land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and
unto thi seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the
oath which I sware unto abraham thi father; 26:4 and I will make thy
se to multipli as the star of heaven, and will give unto thi seed
al these countries; and in thi seed shall all the nation of the
earth be blessed; 26:5 becaus that abraham obey my voice, and kept
mi charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

26:6 and isaac dwelt in gerar: 26:7 and the men of the place ask him
of hi wife; and he said, she is my sister: for he fear to say, she
i my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for
rebekah; becaus she wa fair to look upon.

26:8 and it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that
abimelech king of the philistin look out at a window, and saw,
and, behold, isaac wa sport with rebekah hi wife.

26:9 and abimelech call isaac, and said, behold, of a sureti she is
thi wife; and how saidst thou, she is my sister? and isaac said unto
him, becaus I said, lest I die for her.

26:10 and abimelech said, what is thi thou hast done unto us? one of
th peopl might lightli have lien with thi wife, and thou shouldest
hav brought guilti upon us.

26:11 and abimelech charg all hi people, saying, He that toucheth
thi man or hi wife shall sure be put to death.

26:12 then isaac sow in that land, and receiv in the same year an
hundredfold: and the lord bless him.

26:13 and the man wax great, and went forward, and grew until he
becam veri great: 26:14 for he had possess of flocks, and
possess of herds, and great store of servants: and the philistines
envi him.

26:15 for all the well which hi father' servant had dig in the
day of abraham hi father, the philistin had stop them, and
fil them with earth.

26:16 and abimelech said unto isaac, Go from us; for thou art much
mighti than we.

26:17 and isaac depart thence, and pitch hi tent in the valley of
gerar, and dwelt there.

26:18 and isaac dig again the well of water, which they had digged
in the day of abraham hi father; for the philistin had stopped
them after the death of abraham: and he call their name after the
nam by which hi father had call them.

26:19 and isaac' servant dig in the valley, and found there a
wel of spring water.

26:20 and the herdmen of gerar did strive with isaac' herdmen,
saying, the water is ours: and he call the name of the well esek;
becaus they strove with him.

26:21 and they dig anoth well, and strove for that also: and he
cal the name of it sitnah.

26:22 and he remov from thence, and dig anoth well; and for
that they strove not: and he call the name of it rehoboth; and he
said, for now the lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful
in the land.

26:23 and he went up from thenc to beersheba.

26:24 and the lord appear unto him the same night, and said, I am
th god of abraham thi father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will
bless thee, and multipli thi seed for my servant abraham' sake.

26:25 and he build an altar there, and call upon the name of the
lord, and pitch hi tent there: and there isaac' servant dig a
well.

26:26 then abimelech went to him from gerar, and ahuzzath one of his
friends, and phichol the chief captain of hi army.

26:27 and isaac said unto them, wherefor come ye to me, see ye
hat me, and have sent me away from you?  26:28 and they said, We saw
certainli that the lord wa with thee: and we said, let there be now
an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a
coven with thee; 26:29 that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not
touch thee, and as we have done unto thee noth but good, and have
s thee away in peace: thou art now the bless of the lord.

26:30 and he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.

26:31 and they rose up betim in the morning, and sware one to
another: and isaac sent them away, and they depart from him in
peace.

26:32 and it came to pass the same day, that isaac' servant came,
and told him concern the well which they had digged, and said unto
him, We have found water.

26:33 and he call it shebah: therefor the name of the citi is
beersheba unto thi day.

26:34 and esau wa forti year old when he took to wife judith the
daught of beeri the hittite, and bashemath the daughter of elon the
hittite: 26:35 which were a grief of mind unto isaac and to rebekah.

27:1 and it came to pass, that when isaac wa old, and hi eye were
dim, so that he could not see, he call esau hi eldest son, and said
unto him, My son: and he said unto him, behold, here am i.

27:2 and he said, behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my
death: 27:3 now therefor take, I pray thee, thi weapons, thi quiver
and thi bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; 27:4
and make me savouri meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that i
may eat; that my soul may bless thee befor I die.

27:5 and rebekah heard when isaac spake to esau hi son. and esau went
to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

27:6 and rebekah spake unto jacob her son, saying, behold, I heard thy
fath speak unto esau thi brother, saying, 27:7 bring me venison, and
mak me savouri meat, that I may eat, and bless thee befor the lord
befor my death.

27:8 now therefore, my son, obey my voic accord to that which i
command thee.

27:9 Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thenc two good kid of
th goats; and I will make them savouri meat for thi father, such as
h loveth: 27:10 and thou shalt bring it to thi father, that he may
eat, and that he may bless thee befor hi death.

27:11 and jacob said to rebekah hi mother, behold, esau my brother is
a hairi man, and I am a smooth man: 27:12 My father peradventur will
feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a
curs upon me, and not a blessing.

27:13 and hi mother said unto him, upon me be thi curse, my son: only
obey my voice, and go fetch me them.

27:14 and he went, and fetched, and brought them to hi mother: and
hi mother made savouri meat, such as hi father loved.

27:15 and rebekah took goodli raiment of her eldest son esau, which
wer with her in the house, and put them upon jacob her younger son:
27:16 and she put the skin of the kid of the goat upon hi hands,
and upon the smooth of hi neck: 27:17 and she gave the savouri meat
and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son jacob.

27:18 and he came unto hi father, and said, My father: and he said,
her am I; who art thou, my son?  27:19 and jacob said unto his
father, I am esau thi first born; I have done accord as thou badest
me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thi soul may
bless me.

27:20 and isaac said unto hi son, how is it that thou hast found it
so quickly, my son? and he said, becaus the lord thi god brought it
to me.

27:21 and isaac said unto jacob, come near, I pray thee, that I may
feel thee, my son, whether thou be my veri son esau or not.

27:22 and jacob went near unto isaac hi father; and he felt him, and
said, the voic is jacob' voice, but the hand are the hand of esau.

27:23 and he discern him not, becaus hi hand were hairy, as his
broth esau' hands: so he bless him.

27:24 and he said, art thou my veri son esau? and he said, I am.

27:25 and he said, bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's
venison, that my soul may bless thee. and he brought it near to him,
and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.

27:26 and hi father isaac said unto him, come near now, and kiss me,
mi son.

27:27 and he came near, and kiss him: and he smell the smell of
hi raiment, and bless him, and said, see, the smell of my son is as
th smell of a field which the lord hath blessed: 27:28 therefor god
giv thee of the dew of heaven, and the fat of the earth, and
plenti of corn and wine: 27:29 let peopl serv thee, and nation bow
down to thee: be lord over thi brethren, and let thi mother' son bow
down to thee: curs be everi one that curseth thee, and bless be he
that blesseth thee.

27:30 and it came to pass, as soon as isaac had made an end of
bless jacob, and jacob wa yet scarc gone out from the presenc of
isaac hi father, that esau hi brother came in from hi hunting.

27:31 and he also had made savouri meat, and brought it unto his
father, and said unto hi father, let my father arise, and eat of his
son' venison, that thi soul may bless me.

27:32 and isaac hi father said unto him, who art thou? and he said, i
am thi son, thi firstborn esau.

27:33 and isaac trembl veri exceedingly, and said, who? where is he
that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all
befor thou camest, and have bless him? yea, and he shall be
blessed.

27:34 and when esau heard the word of hi father, he cri with a
great and exceed bitter cry, and said unto hi father, bless me,
even me also, O my father.

27:35 and he said, thi brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away
thi blessing.

27:36 and he said, Is not he rightli name jacob? for he hath
suppl me these two times: he took away my birthright; and,
behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. and he said, hast thou not
reserv a bless for me?  27:37 and isaac answer and said unto
esau, behold, I have made him thi lord, and all hi brethren have i
given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained
him: and what shall I do now unto thee, my son?  27:38 and esau said
unto hi father, hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even
m also, O my father. and esau lift up hi voice, and wept.

27:39 and isaac hi father answer and said unto him, behold, thy
dwel shall be the fat of the earth, and of the dew of heaven
from above; 27:40 and by thi sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve
thi brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the
dominion, that thou shalt break hi yoke from off thi neck.

27:41 and esau hate jacob becaus of the bless wherewith his
fath bless him: and esau said in hi heart, the day of mourning
for my father are at hand; then will I slay my brother jacob.

27:42 and these word of esau her elder son were told to rebekah: and
sh sent and call jacob her younger son, and said unto him, behold,
thi brother esau, as touch thee, doth comfort himself, purpos to
kil thee.

27:43 now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to laban
mi brother to haran; 27:44 and tarri with him a few days, until thy
brother' furi turn away; 27:45 until thi brother' anger turn away
from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then I will
send, and fetch thee from thence: whi should I be depriv also of you
both in one day?  27:46 and rebekah said to isaac, I am weari of my
lif becaus of the daughter of heth: if jacob take a wife of the
daught of heth, such as these which are of the daughter of the
land, what good shall my life do me?  28:1 and isaac call jacob, and
bless him, and charg him, and said unto him, thou shalt not take a
wif of the daughter of canaan.

28:2 arise, go to padanaram, to the hous of bethuel thi mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thenc of the daugher of laban thy
mother' brother.

28:3 and god almighti bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply
thee, that thou mayest be a multitud of people; 28:4 and give thee
th bless of abraham, to thee, and to thi seed with thee; that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which god gave
unto abraham.

28:5 and isaac sent away jacob: and he went to padanaram unto laban,
son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob' and esau's
mother.

28:6 when esau saw that isaac had bless jacob, and sent him away to
padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he bless him
h gave him a charge, saying, thou shalt not take a wife of the
daugh of canaan; 28:7 and that jacob obey hi father and his
mother, and wa gone to padanaram; 28:8 and esau see that the
daught of canaan pleas not isaac hi father; 28:9 then went esau
unto ishmael, and took unto the wive which he had mahalath the
daught of ishmael abraham' son, the sister of nebajoth, to be his
wife.

28:10 and jacob went out from beersheba, and went toward haran.

28:11 and he light upon a certain place, and tarri there all
night, becaus the sun wa set; and he took of the stone of that
place, and put them for hi pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep.

28:12 and he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reach to heaven: and behold the angel of god ascending
and descend on it.

28:13 and, behold, the lord stood abov it, and said, I am the lord
god of abraham thi father, and the god of isaac: the land whereon thou
liest, to thee will I give it, and to thi seed; 28:14 and thi seed
shal be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee
and in thi seed shall all the famili of the earth be blessed.

28:15 and, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whith thou goest, and will bring thee again into thi land; for i
wil not leav thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to
the of.

28:16 and jacob awak out of hi sleep, and he said, sure the lord
i in thi place; and I knew it not.

28:17 and he wa afraid, and said, how dread is thi place! thi is
non other but the hous of god, and thi is the gate of heaven.

28:18 and jacob rose up earli in the morning, and took the stone that
h had put for hi pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and pour oil
upon the top of it.

28:19 and he call the name of that place bethel: but the name of
that citi wa call luz at the first.

28:20 and jacob vow a vow, saying, If god will be with me, and will
keep me in thi way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, 28:21 So that I come again to my father' hous in
peace; then shall the lord be my god: 28:22 and thi stone, which i
hav set for a pillar, shall be god' house: and of all that thou
shalt give me I will sure give the tenth unto thee.

29:1 then jacob went on hi journey, and came into the land of the
peopl of the east.

29:2 and he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there
wer three flock of sheep lie by it; for out of that well they
wat the flocks: and a great stone wa upon the well' mouth.

29:3 and thither were all the flock gathered: and they roll the
ston from the well' mouth, and water the sheep, and put the stone
again upon the well' mouth in hi place.

29:4 and jacob said unto them, My brethren, whenc be ye? and they
said, Of haran are we.

29:5 and he said unto them, know ye laban the son of nahor? and they
said, We know him.

29:6 and he said unto them, Is he well? and they said, He is well:
and, behold, rachel hi daughter cometh with the sheep.

29:7 and he said, lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the
cattl should be gather together: water ye the sheep, and go and
fe them.

29:8 and they said, We cannot, until all the flock be gathered
together, and till they roll the stone from the well' mouth; then we
wat the sheep.

29:9 and while he yet spake with them, rachel came with her father's
sheep; for she kept them.

29:10 and it came to pass, when jacob saw rachel the daughter of laban
hi mother' brother, and the sheep of laban hi mother' brother,
that jacob went near, and roll the stone from the well' mouth, and
wat the flock of laban hi mother' brother.

29:11 and jacob kiss rachel, and lift up hi voice, and wept.

29:12 and jacob told rachel that he wa her father' brother, and that
h wa rebekah' son: and she ran and told her father.

29:13 and it came to pass, when laban heard the tide of jacob his
sister' son, that he ran to meet him, and embrac him, and kissed
him, and brought him to hi house. and he told laban all these things.

29:14 and laban said to him, sure thou art my bone and my flesh. and
h abod with him the space of a month.

29:15 and laban said unto jacob, becaus thou art my brother,
shouldest thou therefor serv me for nought? tell me, what shall thy
wag be?  29:16 and laban had two daughters: the name of the elder
wa leah, and the name of the younger wa rachel.

29:17 leah wa tender eyed; but rachel wa beauti and well
favoured.

29:18 and jacob love rachel; and said, I will serv thee seven years
for rachel thi younger daughter.

29:19 and laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that
i should give her to anoth man: abid with me.

29:20 and jacob serv seven year for rachel; and they seem unto
him but a few days, for the love he had to her.

29:21 and jacob said unto laban, give me my wife, for my day are
fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

29:22 and laban gather togeth all the men of the place, and made a
feast.

29:23 and it came to pass in the evening, that he took leah his
daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.

29:24 and laban gave unto hi daughter leah zilpah hi maid for an
handmaid.

29:25 and it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it wa leah:
and he said to laban, what is thi thou hast done unto me? did not i
serv with thee for rachel? wherefor then hast thou beguil me?
29:26 and laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give
th younger befor the firstborn.

29:27 fulfil her week, and we will give thee thi also for the service
which thou shalt serv with me yet seven other years.

29:28 and jacob did so, and fulfil her week: and he gave him rachel
hi daughter to wife also.

29:29 and laban gave to rachel hi daughter bilhah hi handmaid to be
her maid.

29:30 and he went in also unto rachel, and he love also rachel more
than leah, and serv with him yet seven other years.

29:31 and when the lord saw that leah wa hated, he open her womb:
but rachel wa barren.

29:32 and leah conceived, and bare a son, and she call hi name
reuben: for she said, sure the lord hath look upon my affliction;
now therefor my husband will love me.

29:33 and she conceiv again, and bare a son; and said, becaus the
lord hath heard I wa hated, he hath therefor given me thi son also:
and she call hi name simeon.

29:34 and she conceiv again, and bare a son; and said, now thi time
wil my husband be join unto me, becaus I have born him three sons:
therefor wa hi name call levi.

29:35 and she conceiv again, and bare a son: and she said, now will
i prais the lord: therefor she call hi name judah; and left
bearing.

30:1 and when rachel saw that she bare jacob no children, rachel
envi her sister; and said unto jacob, give me children, or els i
die.

30:2 and jacob' anger wa kindl against rachel: and he said, Am i
in god' stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
30:3 and she said, behold my maid bilhah, go in unto her; and she
shal bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.

30:4 and she gave him bilhah her handmaid to wife: and jacob went in
unto her.

30:5 and bilhah conceived, and bare jacob a son.

30:6 and rachel said, god hath judg me, and hath also heard my
voice, and hath given me a son: therefor call she hi name dan.

30:7 and bilhah rachel' maid conceiv again, and bare jacob a second
son.

30:8 and rachel said, with great wrestl have I wrestl with my
sister, and I have prevailed: and she call hi name naphtali.

30:9 when leah saw that she had left bearing, she took zilpah her
maid, and gave her jacob to wife.

30:10 and zilpah leah' maid bare jacob a son.

30:11 and leah said, A troop cometh: and she call hi name gad.

30:12 and zilpah leah' maid bare jacob a second son.

30:13 and leah said, happi am I, for the daughter will call me
blessed: and she call hi name asher.

30:14 and reuben went in the day of wheat harvest, and found
mandrak in the field, and brought them unto hi mother leah. then
rachel said to leah, give me, I pray thee, of thi son' mandrakes.

30:15 and she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken
mi husband? and wouldest thou take away my son' mandrak also? and
rachel said, therefor he shall lie with thee to night for thi son's
mandrakes.

30:16 and jacob came out of the field in the evening, and leah went
out to meet him, and said, thou must come in unto me; for sure i
hav hire thee with my son' mandrakes. and he lay with her that
night.

30:17 and god hearken unto leah, and she conceived, and bare jacob
th fifth son.

30:18 and leah said, god hath given me my hire, becaus I have given
mi maiden to my husband: and she call hi name issachar.

30:19 and leah conceiv again, and bare jacob the sixth son.

30:20 and leah said, god hath endu me with a good dowry; now will my
husband dwell with me, becaus I have born him six sons: and she
cal hi name zebulun.

30:21 and afterward she bare a daughter, and call her name dinah.

30:22 and god rememb rachel, and god hearken to her, and opened
h womb.

30:23 and she conceived, and bare a son; and said, god hath taken away
mi reproach: 30:24 and she call hi name joseph; and said, the lord
shal add to me anoth son.

30:25 and it came to pass, when rachel had born joseph, that jacob
said unto laban, send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and
to my country.

30:26 give me my wive and my children, for whom I have serv thee,
and let me go: for thou knowest my servic which I have done thee.

30:27 and laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in
thin eyes, tarry: for I have learn by experi that the lord hath
bless me for thi sake.

30:28 and he said, appoint me thi wages, and I will give it.

30:29 and he said unto him, thou knowest how I have serv thee, and
how thi cattl wa with me.

30:30 for it wa littl which thou hadst befor I came, and it is now
increas unto a multitude; and the lord hath bless thee sinc my
coming: and now when shall I provid for mine own hous also?  30:31
and he said, what shall I give thee? and jacob said, thou shalt not
giv me ani thing: if thou wilt do thi thing for me, I will again
fe and keep thi flock.

30:32 I will pass through all thi flock to day, remov from thence
al the speckl and spot cattle, and all the brown cattl among
th sheep, and the spot and speckl among the goats: and of such
shal be my hire.

30:33 So shall my righteous answer for me in time to come, when it
shal come for my hire befor thi face: everi one that is not speckled
and spot among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be
count stolen with me.

30:34 and laban said, behold, I would it might be accord to thy
word.

30:35 and he remov that day the he goat that were ringstrak and
spotted, and all the she goat that were speckl and spotted, and
everi one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the
sheep, and gave them into the hand of hi sons.

30:36 and he set three days' journey betwixt himself and jacob: and
jacob fed the rest of laban' flocks.

30:37 and jacob took him rod of green poplar, and of the hazel and
chesnut tree; and pill white strake in them, and made the white
appear which wa in the rods.

30:38 and he set the rod which he had pill befor the flock in the
gutt in the water trough when the flock came to drink, that
they should conceiv when they came to drink.

30:39 and the flock conceiv befor the rods, and brought forth
cattl ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.

30:40 and jacob did separ the lambs, and set the face of the
flock toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of
laban; and he put hi own flock by themselves, and put them not unto
laban' cattle.

30:41 and it came to pass, whensoev the stronger cattl did
conceive, that jacob laid the rod befor the eye of the cattl in
th gutters, that they might conceiv among the rods.

30:42 but when the cattl were feeble, he put them not in: so the
feebl were laban's, and the stronger jacob's.

30:43 and the man increas exceedingly, and had much cattle, and
maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.

31:1 and he heard the word of laban' sons, saying, jacob hath taken
away all that wa our father's; and of that which wa our father's
hath he gotten all thi glory.

31:2 and jacob beheld the counten of laban, and, behold, it was
not toward him as before.

31:3 and the lord said unto jacob, return unto the land of thy
fathers, and to thi kindred; and I will be with thee.

31:4 and jacob sent and call rachel and leah to the field unto his
flock, 31:5 and said unto them, I see your father' countenance, that
it is not toward me as before; but the god of my father hath been with
me.

31:6 and ye know that with all my power I have serv your father.

31:7 and your father hath deceiv me, and chang my wage ten times;
but god suffer him not to hurt me.

31:8 If he said thus, the speckl shall be thi wages; then all the
cattl bare speckled: and if he said thus, the ringstrak shall be
thi hire; then bare all the cattl ringstraked.

31:9 thu god hath taken away the cattl of your father, and given
them to me.

31:10 and it came to pass at the time that the cattl conceived, that
i lift up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the ram which
leap upon the cattl were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.

31:11 and the angel of god spake unto me in a dream, saying, jacob:
and I said, here am i.

31:12 and he said, lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the ram which
leap upon the cattl are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for i
hav seen all that laban doeth unto thee.

31:13 I am the god of bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and
wher thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this
land, and return unto the land of thi kindred.

31:14 and rachel and leah answer and said unto him, Is there yet any
port or inherit for us in our father' house?  31:15 are we not
count of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quit devoured
also our money.

31:16 for all the rich which god hath taken from our father, that is
ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoev god hath said unto
thee, do.

31:17 then jacob rose up, and set hi son and hi wive upon camels;
31:18 and he carri away all hi cattle, and all hi good which he
had gotten, the cattl of hi getting, which he had gotten in
padanaram, for to go to isaac hi father in the land of canaan.

31:19 and laban went to shear hi sheep: and rachel had stolen the
imag that were her father's.

31:20 and jacob stole away unawar to laban the syrian, in that he
told him not that he fled.

31:21 So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and pass over
th river, and set hi face toward the mount gilead.

31:22 and it wa told laban on the third day that jacob wa fled.

31:23 and he took hi brethren with him, and pursu after him seven
days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount gilead.

31:24 and god came to laban the syrian in a dream by night, and said
unto him, take heed that thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:25 then laban overtook jacob. now jacob had pitch hi tent in the
mount: and laban with hi brethren pitch in the mount of gilead.

31:26 and laban said to jacob, what hast thou done, that thou hast
stolen away unawar to me, and carri away my daughters, as captives
taken with the sword?  31:27 wherefor didst thou flee away secretly,
and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that I might have sent
the away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
31:28 and hast not suffer me to kiss my son and my daughters? thou
hast now done foolishli in so doing.

31:29 It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the god of
your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, take thou heed that
thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:30 and now, though thou wouldest need be gone, becaus thou sore
longedst after thi father' house, yet wherefor hast thou stolen my
gods?  31:31 and jacob answer and said to laban, becaus I was
afraid: for I said, peradventur thou wouldest take by forc thy
daught from me.

31:32 with whomsoev thou findest thi gods, let him not live: before
our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee.
for jacob knew not that rachel had stolen them.

31:33 and laban went into jacob' tent, and into leah' tent, and into
th two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. then went he out
of leah' tent, and enter into rachel' tent.

31:34 now rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's
furniture, and sat upon them. and laban search all the tent, but
found them not.

31:35 and she said to her father, let it not displeas my lord that i
cannot rise up befor thee; for the custom of women is upon me. and he
search but found not the images.

31:36 and jacob wa wroth, and chode with laban: and jacob answered
and said to laban, what is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast
so hotli pursu after me?  31:37 wherea thou hast search all my
stuff, what hast thou found of all thi household stuff? set it here
befor my brethren and thi brethren, that they may judg betwixt us
both.

31:38 thi twenti year have I been with thee; thi ewe and thi she
goat have not cast their young, and the ram of thi flock have I not
eaten.

31:39 that which wa torn of beast I brought not unto thee; I bare
th loss of it; of my hand didst thou requir it, whether stolen by
day, or stolen by night.

31:40 thu I was; in the day the drought consum me, and the frost by
night; and my sleep depart from mine eyes.

31:41 thu have I been twenti year in thi house; I serv thee
fourteen year for thi two daughters, and six year for thi cattle:
and thou hast chang my wage ten times.

31:42 except the god of my father, the god of abraham, and the fear of
isaac, had been with me, sure thou hadst sent me away now empty. god
hath seen mine afflict and the labour of my hands, and rebuk thee
yesternight.

31:43 and laban answer and said unto jacob, these daughter are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattl are my
cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can I do thi day
unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
31:44 now therefor come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and
let it be for a wit between me and thee.

31:45 and jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.

31:46 and jacob said unto hi brethren, gather stones; and they took
stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.

31:47 and laban call it jegarsahadutha: but jacob call it galeed.

31:48 and laban said, thi heap is a wit between me and thee this
day.

therefor wa the name of it call galeed; 31:49 and mizpah; for he
said, the lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from
another.

31:50 If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other
w besid my daughters, no man is with us; see, god is witness
betwixt me and thee.

31:51 and laban said to jacob, behold thi heap, and behold this
pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 thi heap be
witness, and thi pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over thi heap and this
pillar unto me, for harm.

31:53 the god of abraham, and the god of nahor, the god of their
father, judg betwixt us. and jacob sware by the fear of hi father
isaac.

31:54 then jacob offer sacrific upon the mount, and call his
brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarri all night
in the mount.

31:55 and earli in the morn laban rose up, and kiss hi son and
hi daughters, and bless them: and laban departed, and return unto
hi place.

32:1 and jacob went on hi way, and the angel of god met him.

32:2 and when jacob saw them, he said, thi is god' host: and he
cal the name of that place mahanaim.

32:3 and jacob sent messeng befor him to esau hi brother unto the
land of seir, the countri of edom.

32:4 and he command them, saying, thu shall ye speak unto my lord
esau; thi servant jacob saith thus, I have sojourn with laban, and
stay there until now: 32:5 and I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and
menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to tell my lord, that
i may find grace in thi sight.

32:6 and the messeng return to jacob, saying, We came to thy
broth esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundr men
with him.

32:7 then jacob wa greatli afraid and distressed: and he divid the
peopl that wa with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
into two bands; 32:8 and said, If esau come to the one company, and
smit it, then the other compani which is left shall escape.

32:9 and jacob said, O god of my father abraham, and god of my father
isaac, the lord which saidst unto me, return unto thi country, and to
thi kindred, and I will deal well with thee: 32:10 I am not worthi of
th least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast
shew unto thi servant; for with my staff I pass over thi jordan;
and now I am becom two bands.

32:11 deliv me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the
moth with the children.

32:12 and thou saidst, I will sure do thee good, and make thi seed
a the sand of the sea, which cannot be number for multitude.

32:13 and he lodg there that same night; and took of that which came
to hi hand a present for esau hi brother; 32:14 two hundr she
goats, and twenti he goats, two hundr ewes, and twenti rams, 32:15
thirti milch camel with their colts, forti kine, and ten bulls,
twenti she asses, and ten foals.

32:16 and he deliv them into the hand of hi servants, everi drove
bi themselves; and said unto hi servants, pass over befor me, and
put a space betwixt drove and drove.

32:17 and he command the foremost, saying, when esau my brother
meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, whose art thou? and whither
goest thou? and whose are these befor thee?  32:18 then thou shalt
say, they be thi servant jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord
esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.

32:19 and so command he the second, and the third, and all that
follow the droves, saying, On thi manner shall ye speak unto esau,
when ye find him.

32:20 and say ye moreover, behold, thi servant jacob is behind us. for
h said, I will appeas him with the present that goeth befor me, and
afterward I will see hi face; peradventur he will accept of me.

32:21 So went the present over befor him: and himself lodg that
night in the company.

32:22 and he rose up that night, and took hi two wives, and hi two
womenservants, and hi eleven sons, and pass over the ford jabbok.

32:23 and he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over
that he had.

32:24 and jacob wa left alone; and there wrestl a man with him
until the break of the day.

32:25 and when he saw that he prevail not against him, he touched
th hollow of hi thigh; and the hollow of jacob' thigh wa out of
joint, as he wrestl with him.

32:26 and he said, let me go, for the day breaketh. and he said, i
wil not let thee go, except thou bless me.

32:27 and he said unto him, what is thi name? and he said, jacob.

32:28 and he said, thi name shall be call no more jacob, but israel:
for as a princ hast thou power with god and with men, and hast
prevailed.

32:29 and jacob ask him, and said, tell me, I pray thee, thi name.
and he said, wherefor is it that thou dost ask after my name? and he
bless him there.

32:30 and jacob call the name of the place peniel: for I have seen
god face to face, and my life is preserved.

32:31 and as he pass over penuel the sun rose upon him, and he
halt upon hi thigh.

32:32 therefor the children of israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto thi day: because
h touch the hollow of jacob' thigh in the sinew that shrank.

33:1 and jacob lift up hi eyes, and looked, and, behold, esau came,
and with him four hundr men. and he divid the children unto leah,
and unto rachel, and unto the two handmaids.

33:2 and he put the handmaid and their children foremost, and leah
and her children after, and rachel and joseph hindermost.

33:3 and he pass over befor them, and bow himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to hi brother.

33:4 and esau ran to meet him, and embrac him, and fell on hi neck,
and kiss him: and they wept.

33:5 and he lift up hi eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, who are those with thee? and he said, the children which god
hath gracious given thi servant.

33:6 then the handmaiden came near, they and their children, and they
bow themselves.

33:7 and leah also with her children came near, and bow themselves:
and after came joseph near and rachel, and they bow themselves.

33:8 and he said, what meanest thou by all thi drove which I met? and
h said, these are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

33:9 and esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.

33:10 and jacob said, nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in
thi sight, then receiv my present at my hand: for therefor I have
seen thi face, as though I had seen the face of god, and thou wast
pleas with me.

33:11 take, I pray thee, my bless that is brought to thee; because
god hath dealt gracious with me, and becaus I have enough. and he
urg him, and he took it.

33:12 and he said, let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will
go befor thee.

33:13 and he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are
tender, and the flock and herd with young are with me: and if men
should overdr them one day, all the flock will die.

33:14 let my lord, I pray thee, pass over befor hi servant: and i
wil lead on softly, accord as the cattl that goeth befor me and
th children be abl to endure, until I come unto my lord unto seir.

33:15 and esau said, let me now leav with thee some of the folk that
ar with me. and he said, what needeth it? let me find grace in the
sight of my lord.

33:16 So esau return that day on hi way unto seir.

33:17 and jacob journey to succoth, and built him an house, and made
booth for hi cattle: therefor the name of the place is called
succoth.

33:18 and jacob came to shalem, a citi of shechem, which is in the
land of canaan, when he came from padanaram; and pitch hi tent
befor the city.

33:19 and he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread hi tent,
at the hand of the children of hamor, shechem' father, for an hundred
piec of money.

33:20 and he erect there an altar, and call it eleloheisrael.

34:1 and dinah the daughter of leah, which she bare unto jacob, went
out to see the daughter of the land.

34:2 and when shechem the son of hamor the hivite, princ of the
country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defil her.

34:3 and hi soul clave unto dinah the daughter of jacob, and he loved
th damsel, and spake kindli unto the damsel.

34:4 and shechem spake unto hi father hamor, saying, get me this
damsel to wife.

34:5 and jacob heard that he had defil dinah hi daughter: now his
son were with hi cattl in the field: and jacob held hi peac until
they were come.

34:6 and hamor the father of shechem went out unto jacob to commune
with him.

34:7 and the son of jacob came out of the field when they heard it:
and the men were grieved, and they were veri wroth, becaus he had
wrought folli in israel in lie with jacob' daughter: which thing
ought not to be done.

34:8 and hamor commun with them, saying, the soul of my son shechem
longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.

34:9 and make ye marriag with us, and give your daughter unto us,
and take our daughter unto you.

34:10 and ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be befor you;
dwel and trade ye therein, and get you possess therein.

34:11 and shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, let me
find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.

34:12 ask me never so much dowri and gift, and I will give according
a ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.

34:13 and the son of jacob answer shechem and hamor hi father
deceitfully, and said, becaus he had defil dinah their sister:
34:14 and they said unto them, We cannot do thi thing, to give our
sist to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
34:15 but in thi will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be,
that everi male of you be circumcised; 34:16 then will we give our
daught unto you, and we will take your daughter to us, and we will
dwel with you, and we will becom one people.

34:17 but if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will
w take our daughter, and we will be gone.

34:18 and their word pleas hamor, and shechem hamor' son.

34:19 and the young man defer not to do the thing, becaus he had
delight in jacob' daughter: and he wa more honour than all the
hous of hi father.

34:20 and hamor and shechem hi son came unto the gate of their city,
and commun with the men of their city, saying, 34:21 these men are
peac with us; therefor let them dwell in the land, and trade
therein; for the land, behold, it is larg enough for them; let us
tak their daughter to us for wives, and let us give them our
daughters.

34:22 onli herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us,
to be one people, if everi male among us be circumcised, as they are
circumcised.

34:23 shall not their cattl and their substanc and everi beast of
their' be our's? onli let us consent unto them, and they will dwell
with us.

34:24 and unto hamor and unto shechem hi son hearken all that went
out of the gate of hi city; and everi male wa circumcised, all that
went out of the gate of hi city.

34:25 and it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that
two of the son of jacob, simeon and levi, dinah' brethren, took each
man hi sword, and came upon the citi boldly, and slew all the males.

34:26 and they slew hamor and shechem hi son with the edg of the
sword, and took dinah out of shechem' house, and went out.

34:27 the son of jacob came upon the slain, and spoil the city,
becaus they had defil their sister.

34:28 they took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that
which wa in the city, and that which wa in the field, 34:29 and all
their wealth, and all their littl ones, and their wive took they
captive, and spoil even all that wa in the house.

34:30 and jacob said to simeon and levi, Ye have troubl me to make
m to stink among the inhabit of the land, among the canaanites
and the perizzites: and I be few in number, they shall gather
themselv togeth against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed,
i and my house.

34:31 and they said, should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
35:1 and god said unto jacob, arise, go up to bethel, and dwell there:
and make there an altar unto god, that appear unto thee when thou
fleddest from the face of esau thi brother.

35:2 then jacob said unto hi household, and to all that were with
him, put away the strang god that are among you, and be clean, and
chang your garments: 35:3 and let us arise, and go up to bethel; and
i will make there an altar unto god, who answer me in the day of my
distress, and wa with me in the way which I went.

35:4 and they gave unto jacob all the strang god which were in their
hand, and all their ear which were in their ears; and jacob hid
them under the oak which wa by shechem.

35:5 and they journeyed: and the terror of god wa upon the cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursu after the son of
jacob.

35:6 So jacob came to luz, which is in the land of canaan, that is,
bethel, he and all the peopl that were with him.

35:7 and he built there an altar, and call the place elbethel:
becaus there god appear unto him, when he fled from the face of his
brother.

35:8 but deborah rebekah' nurs died, and she wa buri beneath
bethel under an oak: and the name of it wa call allonbachuth.

35:9 and god appear unto jacob again, when he came out of padanaram,
and bless him.

35:10 and god said unto him, thi name is jacob: thi name shall not be
cal ani more jacob, but israel shall be thi name: and he call his
nam israel.

35:11 and god said unto him, I am god almighty: be fruit and
multiply; a nation and a compani of nation shall be of thee, and
k shall come out of thi loins; 35:12 and the land which I gave
abraham and isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thi seed after thee
wil I give the land.

35:13 and god went up from him in the place where he talk with him.

35:14 and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talk with him,
even a pillar of stone: and he pour a drink offer thereon, and he
pour oil thereon.

35:15 and jacob call the name of the place where god spake with him,
bethel.

35:16 and they journey from bethel; and there wa but a littl way
to come to ephrath: and rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.

35:17 and it came to pass, when she wa in hard labour, that the
midwif said unto her, fear not; thou shalt have thi son also.

35:18 and it came to pass, as her soul wa in departing, (for she
died) that she call hi name benoni: but hi father call him
benjamin.

35:19 and rachel died, and wa buri in the way to ephrath, which is
bethlehem.

35:20 and jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of
rachel' grave unto thi day.

35:21 and israel journeyed, and spread hi tent beyond the tower of
edar.

35:22 and it came to pass, when israel dwelt in that land, that reuben
w and lay with bilhah hi father' concubine: and israel heard it.
now the son of jacob were twelve: 35:23 the son of leah; reuben,
jacob' firstborn, and simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and
zebulun: 35:24 the son of rachel; joseph, and benjamin: 35:25 and the
son of bilhah, rachel' handmaid; dan, and naphtali: 35:26 and the
son of zilpah, leah' handmaid: gad, and asher: these are the son of
jacob, which were born to him in padanaram.

35:27 and jacob came unto isaac hi father unto mamre, unto the city
of arbah, which is hebron, where abraham and isaac sojourned.

35:28 and the day of isaac were an hundr and fourscor years.

35:29 and isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and wa gather unto his
people, be old and full of days: and hi son esau and jacob buried
him.

36:1 now these are the gener of esau, who is edom.

36:2 esau took hi wive of the daughter of canaan; adah the daughter
of elon the hittite, and aholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter
of zibeon the hivite; 36:3 and bashemath ishmael' daughter, sister of
nebajoth.

36:4 and adah bare to esau eliphaz; and bashemath bare reuel; 36:5 and
aholibamah bare jeush, and jaalam, and korah: these are the son of
esau, which were born unto him in the land of canaan.

36:6 and esau took hi wives, and hi sons, and hi daughters, and all
th person of hi house, and hi cattle, and all hi beasts, and all
hi substance, which he had got in the land of canaan; and went into
th countri from the face of hi brother jacob.

36:7 for their rich were more than that they might dwell together;
and the land wherein they were stranger could not bear them because
of their cattle.

36:8 thu dwelt esau in mount seir: esau is edom.

36:9 and these are the gener of esau the father of the edomites
in mount seir: 36:10 these are the name of esau' sons; eliphaz the
son of adah the wife of esau, reuel the son of bashemath the wife of
esau.

36:11 and the son of eliphaz were teman, omar, zepho, and gatam, and
kenaz.

36:12 and timna wa concubin to eliphaz esau' son; and she bare to
eliphaz amalek: these were the son of adah esau' wife.

36:13 and these are the son of reuel; nahath, and zerah, shammah, and
mizzah: these were the son of bashemath esau' wife.

36:14 and these were the son of aholibamah, the daughter of anah the
daught of zibeon, esau' wife: and she bare to esau jeush, and
jaalam, and korah.

36:15 these were duke of the son of esau: the son of eliphaz the
firstborn son of esau; duke teman, duke omar, duke zepho, duke kenaz,
36:16 duke korah, duke gatam, and duke amalek: these are the dukes
that came of eliphaz in the land of edom; these were the son of adah.

36:17 and these are the son of reuel esau' son; duke nahath, duke
zerah, duke shammah, duke mizzah: these are the duke that came of
reuel in the land of edom; these are the son of bashemath esau's
wife.

36:18 and these are the son of aholibamah esau' wife; duke jeush,
duk jaalam, duke korah: these were the duke that came of aholibamah
th daughter of anah, esau' wife.

36:19 these are the son of esau, who is edom, and these are their
dukes.

36:20 these are the son of seir the horite, who inhabit the land;
lotan, and shobal, and zibeon, and anah, 36:21 and dishon, and ezer,
and dishan: these are the duke of the horites, the children of seir
in the land of edom.

36:22 and the children of lotan were hori and hemam; and lotan's
sist wa timna.

36:23 and the children of shobal were these; alvan, and manahath, and
ebal, shepho, and onam.

36:24 and these are the children of zibeon; both ajah, and anah: this
wa that anah that found the mule in the wilderness, as he fed the
ass of zibeon hi father.

36:25 and the children of anah were these; dishon, and aholibamah the
daught of anah.

36:26 and these are the children of dishon; hemdan, and eshban, and
ithran, and cheran.

36:27 the children of ezer are these; bilhan, and zaavan, and akan.

36:28 the children of dishan are these; uz, and aran.

36:29 these are the duke that came of the horites; duke lotan, duke
shobal, duke zibeon, duke anah, 36:30 duke dishon, duke ezer, duke
dishan: these are the duke that came of hori, among their duke in
th land of seir.

36:31 and these are the king that reign in the land of edom, before
ther reign ani king over the children of israel.

36:32 and bela the son of beor reign in edom: and the name of his
citi wa dinhabah.

36:33 and bela died, and jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reign in
hi stead.

36:34 and jobab died, and husham of the land of temani reign in his
stead.

36:35 and husham died, and hadad the son of bedad, who smote midian in
th field of moab, reign in hi stead: and the name of hi citi was
avith.

36:36 and hadad died, and samlah of masrekah reign in hi stead.

36:37 and samlah died, and saul of rehoboth by the river reign in
hi stead.

36:38 and saul died, and baalhanan the son of achbor reign in his
stead.

36:39 and baalhanan the son of achbor died, and hadar reign in his
stead: and the name of hi citi wa pau; and hi wife' name was
mehetabel, the daughter of matred, the daughter of mezahab.

36:40 and these are the name of the duke that came of esau,
accord to their families, after their places, by their names; duke
timnah, duke alvah, duke jetheth, 36:41 duke aholibamah, duke elah,
duk pinon, 36:42 duke kenaz, duke teman, duke mibzar, 36:43 duke
magdiel, duke iram: these be the duke of edom, accord to their
habit in the land of their possession: he is esau the father of
th edomites.

37:1 and jacob dwelt in the land wherein hi father wa a stranger, in
th land of canaan.

37:2 these are the gener of jacob. joseph, be seventeen years
old, wa feed the flock with hi brethren; and the lad wa with the
son of bilhah, and with the son of zilpah, hi father' wives: and
joseph brought unto hi father their evil report.

37:3 now israel love joseph more than all hi children, becaus he
wa the son of hi old age: and he made him a coat of mani colours.

37:4 and when hi brethren saw that their father love him more than
al hi brethren, they hate him, and could not speak peaceabl unto
him.

37:5 and joseph dream a dream, and he told it hi brethren: and they
hat him yet the more.

37:6 and he said unto them, hear, I pray you, thi dream which I have
dreamed: 37:7 for, behold, we were bind sheav in the field, and,
lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves
stood round about, and made obeis to my sheaf.

37:8 and hi brethren said to him, shalt thou inde reign over us? or
shalt thou inde have dominion over us? and they hate him yet the
mor for hi dreams, and for hi words.

37:9 and he dream yet anoth dream, and told it hi brethren, and
said, behold, I have dream a dream more; and, behold, the sun and
th moon and the eleven star made obeis to me.

37:10 and he told it to hi father, and to hi brethren: and his
fath rebuk him, and said unto him, what is thi dream that thou
hast dreamed?  shall I and thi mother and thi brethren inde come to
bow down ourselv to thee to the earth?  37:11 and hi brethren
envi him; but hi father observ the saying.

37:12 and hi brethren went to feed their father' flock in shechem.

37:13 and israel said unto joseph, Do not thi brethren feed the flock
in shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. and he said to him,
her am i.

37:14 and he said to him, go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with
thi brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he
sent him out of the vale of hebron, and he came to shechem.

37:15 and a certain man found him, and, behold, he wa wander in
th field: and the man ask him, saying, what seekest thou?  37:16
and he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed
their flocks.

37:17 and the man said, they are depart hence; for I heard them say,
let us go to dothan. and joseph went after hi brethren, and found
them in dothan.

37:18 and when they saw him afar off, even befor he came near unto
them, they conspir against him to slay him.

37:19 and they said one to another, behold, thi dreamer cometh.

37:20 come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some
pit, and we will say, some evil beast hath devour him: and we shall
se what will becom of hi dreams.

37:21 and reuben heard it, and he deliv him out of their hands;
and said, let us not kill him.

37:22 and reuben said unto them, shed no blood, but cast him into this
pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might
rid him out of their hands, to deliv him to hi father again.

37:23 and it came to pass, when joseph wa come unto hi brethren,
that they stript joseph out of hi coat, hi coat of mani colour that
wa on him; 37:24 and they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the
pit wa empty, there wa no water in it.

37:25 and they sat down to eat bread: and they lift up their eyes
and looked, and, behold, a compani of ishmeelit came from gilead
with their camel bear spiceri and balm and myrrh, go to carry
it down to egypt.

37:26 and judah said unto hi brethren, what profit is it if we slay
our brother, and conceal hi blood?  37:27 come, and let us sell him
to the ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our
broth and our flesh. and hi brethren were content.

37:28 then there pass by midianit merchantmen; and they drew and
lift up joseph out of the pit, and sold joseph to the ishmeelites
for twenti piec of silver: and they brought joseph into egypt.

37:29 and reuben return unto the pit; and, behold, joseph wa not in
th pit; and he rent hi clothes.

37:30 and he return unto hi brethren, and said, the child is not;
and I, whither shall I go?  37:31 and they took joseph' coat, and
kil a kid of the goats, and dip the coat in the blood; 37:32 and
they sent the coat of mani colours, and they brought it to their
father; and said, thi have we found: know now whether it be thi son's
coat or no.

37:33 and he knew it, and said, It is my son' coat; an evil beast
hath devour him; joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.

37:34 and jacob rent hi clothes, and put sackcloth upon hi loins,
and mourn for hi son mani days.

37:35 and all hi son and all hi daughter rose up to comfort him;
but he refus to be comforted; and he said, for I will go down into
th grave unto my son mourning. thu hi father wept for him.

37:36 and the midianit sold him into egypt unto potiphar, an officer
of pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.

38:1 and it came to pass at that time, that judah went down from his
brethren, and turn in to a certain adullamite, whose name wa hirah.

38:2 and judah saw there a daughter of a certain canaanite, whose name
wa shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.

38:3 and she conceived, and bare a son; and he call hi name er.

38:4 and she conceiv again, and bare a son; and she call hi name
onan.

38:5 and she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and call hi name
shelah: and he wa at chezib, when she bare him.

38:6 and judah took a wife for Er hi firstborn, whose name wa tamar.

38:7 and er, judah' firstborn, wa wick in the sight of the lord;
and the lord slew him.

38:8 and judah said unto onan, Go in unto thi brother' wife, and
marri her, and rais up seed to thi brother.

38:9 and onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to
pass, when he went in unto hi brother' wife, that he spill it on
th ground, lest that he should give seed to hi brother.

38:10 and the thing which he did displeas the lord: wherefor he
slew him also.

38:11 then said judah to tamar hi daughter in law, remain a widow at
thi father' house, till shelah my son be grown: for he said, lest
peradventur he die also, as hi brethren did. and tamar went and
dwelt in her father' house.

38:12 and in process of time the daughter of shuah judah' wife died;
and judah wa comforted, and went up unto hi sheepshear to
timnath, he and hi friend hirah the adullamite.

38:13 and it wa told tamar, saying, behold thi father in law goeth up
to timnath to shear hi sheep.

38:14 and she put her widow' garment off from her, and cover her
with a vail, and wrap herself, and sat in an open place, which is
bi the way to timnath; for she saw that shelah wa grown, and she was
not given unto him to wife.

38:15 when judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; becaus she
had cover her face.

38:16 and he turn unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee,
let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she wa hi daughter
in law.) and she said, what wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come
in unto me?  38:17 and he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock.
and she said, wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?  38:18
and he said, what pledg shall I give thee? and she said, thi signet,
and thi bracelets, and thi staff that is in thine hand. and he gave it
her, and came in unto her, and she conceiv by him.

38:19 and she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and
put on the garment of her widowhood.

38:20 and judah sent the kid by the hand of hi friend the adullamite,
to receiv hi pledg from the woman' hand: but he found her not.

38:21 then he ask the men of that place, saying, where is the
harlot, that wa openli by the way side? and they said, there wa no
harlot in thi place.

38:22 and he return to judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also
th men of the place said, that there wa no harlot in thi place.

38:23 and judah said, let her take it to her, lest we be shamed:
behold, I sent thi kid, and thou hast not found her.

38:24 and it came to pass about three month after, that it wa told
judah, saying, tamar thi daughter in law hath play the harlot; and
also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. and judah said, bring her
forth, and let her be burnt.

38:25 when she wa brought forth, she sent to her father in law,
saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child: and she said,
discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and
staff.

38:26 and judah acknowledg them, and said, she hath been more
right than I; becaus that I gave her not to shelah my son. and he
knew her again no more.

38:27 and it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold,
twin were in her womb.

38:28 and it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out
hi hand: and the midwif took and bound upon hi hand a scarlet
thread, saying, thi came out first.

38:29 and it came to pass, as he drew back hi hand, that, behold, his
broth came out: and she said, how hast thou broken forth? this
breach be upon thee: therefor hi name wa call pharez.

38:30 and afterward came out hi brother, that had the scarlet thread
upon hi hand: and hi name wa call zarah.

39:1 and joseph wa brought down to egypt; and potiphar, an offic of
pharaoh, captain of the guard, an egyptian, bought him of the hand of
th ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.

39:2 and the lord wa with joseph, and he wa a prosper man; and he
wa in the hous of hi master the egyptian.

39:3 and hi master saw that the lord wa with him, and that the lord
mad all that he did to prosper in hi hand.

39:4 and joseph found grace in hi sight, and he serv him: and he
mad him overs over hi house, and all that he had he put into his
hand.

39:5 and it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer
in hi house, and over all that he had, that the lord bless the
egyptian' hous for joseph' sake; and the bless of the lord was
upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.

39:6 and he left all that he had in joseph' hand; and he knew not
ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. and joseph wa a goodly
person, and well favoured.

39:7 and it came to pass after these things, that hi master' wife
cast her eye upon joseph; and she said, lie with me.

39:8 but he refused, and said unto hi master' wife, behold, my
mast wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed
al that he hath to my hand; 39:9 there is none greater in thi house
than I; neither hath he kept back ani thing from me but thee, because
th art hi wife: how then can I do thi great wickedness, and sin
against god?  39:10 and it came to pass, as she spake to joseph day by
day, that he hearken not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

39:11 and it came to pass about thi time, that joseph went into the
hous to do hi business; and there wa none of the men of the house
ther within.

39:12 and she caught him by hi garment, saying, lie with me: and he
left hi garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.

39:13 and it came to pass, when she saw that he had left hi garment
in her hand, and wa fled forth, 39:14 that she call unto the men of
her house, and spake unto them, saying, see, he hath brought in an
hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and i
cri with a loud voice: 39:15 and it came to pass, when he heard that
i lift up my voic and cried, that he left hi garment with me, and
fled, and got him out.

39:16 and she laid up hi garment by her, until hi lord came home.

39:17 and she spake unto him accord to these words, saying, the
hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to
mock me: 39:18 and it came to pass, as I lift up my voic and cried,
that he left hi garment with me, and fled out.

39:19 and it came to pass, when hi master heard the word of his
wife, which she spake unto him, saying, after thi manner did thy
serv to me; that hi wrath wa kindled.

39:20 and joseph' master took him, and put him into the prison, a
plac where the king' prison were bound: and he wa there in the
prison.

39:21 but the lord wa with joseph, and shew him mercy, and gave him
favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.

39:22 and the keeper of the prison commit to joseph' hand all the
prison that were in the prison; and whatsoev they did there, he
wa the doer of it.

39:23 the keeper of the prison look not to ani thing that wa under
hi hand; becaus the lord wa with him, and that which he did, the
lord made it to prosper.

40:1 and it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the
k of egypt and hi baker had offend their lord the king of egypt.

40:2 and pharaoh wa wroth against two of hi officers, against the
chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.

40:3 and he put them in ward in the hous of the captain of the guard,
into the prison, the place where joseph wa bound.

40:4 and the captain of the guard charg joseph with them, and he
serv them: and they continu a season in ward.

40:5 and they dream a dream both of them, each man hi dream in one
night, each man accord to the interpret of hi dream, the
butl and the baker of the king of egypt, which were bound in the
prison.

40:6 and joseph came in unto them in the morning, and look upon
them, and, behold, they were sad.

40:7 and he ask pharaoh' offic that were with him in the ward of
hi lord' house, saying, wherefor look ye so sadli to day?  40:8 and
they said unto him, We have dream a dream, and there is no
interpret of it. and joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations
belong to god? tell me them, I pray you.

40:9 and the chief butler told hi dream to joseph, and said to him,
in my dream, behold, a vine wa befor me; 40:10 and in the vine were
thre branches: and it wa as though it budded, and her blossom shot
forth; and the cluster thereof brought forth ripe grapes: 40:11 and
pharaoh' cup wa in my hand: and I took the grapes, and press them
into pharaoh' cup, and I gave the cup into pharaoh' hand.

40:12 and joseph said unto him, thi is the interpret of it: the
thre branch are three days: 40:13 yet within three day shall
pharaoh lift up thine head, and restor thee unto thi place: and thou
shalt deliv pharaoh' cup into hi hand, after the former manner
when thou wast hi butler.

40:14 but think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew
kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto pharaoh,
and bring me out of thi house: 40:15 for inde I wa stolen away out
of the land of the hebrews: and here also have I done noth that
they should put me into the dungeon.

40:16 when the chief baker saw that the interpret wa good, he
said unto joseph, I also wa in my dream, and, behold, I had three
whit basket on my head: 40:17 and in the uppermost basket there was
of all manner of bakemeat for pharaoh; and the bird did eat them out
of the basket upon my head.

40:18 and joseph answer and said, thi is the interpretation
thereof: the three basket are three days: 40:19 yet within three days
shal pharaoh lift up thi head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a
tree; and the bird shall eat thi flesh from off thee.

40:20 and it came to pass the third day, which wa pharaoh' birthday,
that he made a feast unto all hi servants: and he lift up the head
of the chief butler and of the chief baker among hi servants.

40:21 and he restor the chief butler unto hi butlership again; and
h gave the cup into pharaoh' hand: 40:22 but he hang the chief
baker: as joseph had interpret to them.

40:23 yet did not the chief butler rememb joseph, but forgat him.

41:1 and it came to pass at the end of two full years, that pharaoh
dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.

41:2 and, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured
kin and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.

41:3 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the
river, ill favour and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon
th brink of the river.

41:4 and the ill favour and leanflesh kine did eat up the seven
wel favour and fat kine. So pharaoh awoke.

41:5 and he slept and dream the second time: and, behold, seven ears
of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.

41:6 and, behold, seven thin ear and blast with the east wind
sprung up after them.

41:7 and the seven thin ear devour the seven rank and full ears.
and pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it wa a dream.

41:8 and it came to pass in the morn that hi spirit wa troubled;
and he sent and call for all the magician of egypt, and all the
wis men thereof: and pharaoh told them hi dream; but there wa none
that could interpret them unto pharaoh.

41:9 then spake the chief butler unto pharaoh, saying, I do remember
mi fault thi day: 41:10 pharaoh wa wroth with hi servants, and put
m in ward in the captain of the guard' house, both me and the chief
baker: 41:11 and we dream a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed
each man accord to the interpret of hi dream.

41:12 and there wa there with us a young man, an hebrew, servant to
th captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpret to us
our dreams; to each man accord to hi dream he did interpret.

41:13 and it came to pass, as he interpret to us, so it was; me he
restor unto mine office, and him he hanged.

41:14 then pharaoh sent and call joseph, and they brought him
hastili out of the dungeon: and he shave himself, and chang his
raiment, and came in unto pharaoh.

41:15 and pharaoh said unto joseph, I have dream a dream, and there
i none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thee, that thou
canst understand a dream to interpret it.

41:16 and joseph answer pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: god shall
giv pharaoh an answer of peace.

41:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon
th bank of the river: 41:18 and, behold, there came up out of the
riv seven kine, fatflesh and well favoured; and they fed in a
meadow: 41:19 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor
and veri ill favour and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the
land of egypt for badness: 41:20 and the lean and the ill favoured
kin did eat up the first seven fat kine: 41:21 and when they had
eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but
they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.

41:22 and I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ear came up in one
stalk, full and good: 41:23 and, behold, seven ears, withered, thin,
and blast with the east wind, sprung up after them: 41:24 and the
thin ear devour the seven good ears: and I told thi unto the
magicians; but there wa none that could declar it to me.

41:25 and joseph said unto pharaoh, the dream of pharaoh is one: god
hath shew pharaoh what he is about to do.

41:26 the seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ear are
seven years: the dream is one.

41:27 and the seven thin and ill favour kine that came up after them
ar seven years; and the seven empti ear blast with the east wind
shal be seven year of famine.

41:28 thi is the thing which I have spoken unto pharaoh: what god is
about to do he sheweth unto pharaoh.

41:29 behold, there come seven year of great plenti throughout all
th land of egypt: 41:30 and there shall aris after them seven years
of famine; and all the plenti shall be forgotten in the land of egypt;
and the famin shall consum the land; 41:31 and the plenti shall not
b known in the land by reason of that famin following; for it shall
b veri grievous.

41:32 and for that the dream wa doubl unto pharaoh twice; it is
becaus the thing is establish by god, and god will shortli bring it
to pass.

41:33 now therefor let pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and
set him over the land of egypt.

41:34 let pharaoh do this, and let him appoint offic over the land,
and take up the fifth part of the land of egypt in the seven plenteous
years.

41:35 and let them gather all the food of those good year that come,
and lay up corn under the hand of pharaoh, and let them keep food in
th cities.

41:36 and that food shall be for store to the land against the seven
year of famine, which shall be in the land of egypt; that the land
perish not through the famine.

41:37 and the thing wa good in the eye of pharaoh, and in the eyes
of all hi servants.

41:38 and pharaoh said unto hi servants, can we find such a one as
thi is, a man in whom the spirit of god is?  41:39 and pharaoh said
unto joseph, forasmuch as god hath shew thee all this, there is none
so discreet and wise as thou art: 41:40 thou shalt be over my house,
and accord unto thi word shall all my peopl be ruled: onli in the
thron will I be greater than thou.

41:41 and pharaoh said unto joseph, see, I have set thee over all the
land of egypt.

41:42 and pharaoh took off hi ring from hi hand, and put it upon
joseph' hand, and array him in vestur of fine linen, and put a
gold chain about hi neck; 41:43 and he made him to ride in the second
chariot which he had; and they cri befor him, bow the knee: and he
mad him ruler over all the land of egypt.

41:44 and pharaoh said unto joseph, I am pharaoh, and without thee
shal no man lift up hi hand or foot in all the land of egypt.

41:45 and pharaoh call joseph' name zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave
him to wife asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on. and
joseph went out over all the land of egypt.

41:46 and joseph wa thirti year old when he stood befor pharaoh
k of egypt. and joseph went out from the presenc of pharaoh, and
went throughout all the land of egypt.

41:47 and in the seven plenteou year the earth brought forth by
handfuls.

41:48 and he gather up all the food of the seven years, which were
in the land of egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of
th field, which wa round about everi city, laid he up in the same.

41:49 and joseph gather corn as the sand of the sea, veri much,
until he left numbering; for it wa without number.

41:50 and unto joseph were born two son befor the year of famine
came, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of On bare unto
him.

41:51 and joseph call the name of the firstborn manasseh: for god,
said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father' house.

41:52 and the name of the second call he ephraim: for god hath
caus me to be fruit in the land of my affliction.

41:53 and the seven year of plenteousness, that wa in the land of
egypt, were ended.

41:54 and the seven year of dearth began to come, accord as joseph
had said: and the dearth wa in all lands; but in all the land of
egypt there wa bread.

41:55 and when all the land of egypt wa famished, the peopl cri to
pharaoh for bread: and pharaoh said unto all the egyptians, Go unto
joseph; what he saith to you, do.

41:56 and the famin wa over all the face of the earth: and joseph
open all the storehouses, and sold unto the egyptians; and the
famin wax sore in the land of egypt.

41:57 and all countri came into egypt to joseph for to buy corn;
becaus that the famin wa so sore in all lands.

42:1 now when jacob saw that there wa corn in egypt, jacob said unto
hi sons, whi do ye look one upon another?  42:2 and he said, behold,
i have heard that there is corn in egypt: get you down thither, and
buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.

42:3 and joseph' ten brethren went down to buy corn in egypt.

42:4 but benjamin, joseph' brother, jacob sent not with hi brethren;
for he said, lest peradventur mischief befal him.

42:5 and the son of israel came to buy corn among those that came:
for the famin wa in the land of canaan.

42:6 and joseph wa the governor over the land, and he it wa that
sold to all the peopl of the land: and joseph' brethren came, and
bow down themselv befor him with their face to the earth.

42:7 and joseph saw hi brethren, and he knew them, but made himself
strang unto them, and spake roughli unto them; and he said unto them,
whenc come ye? and they said, from the land of canaan to buy food.

42:8 and joseph knew hi brethren, but they knew not him.

42:9 and joseph rememb the dream which he dream of them, and
said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the naked of the land ye are
come.

42:10 and they said unto him, nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy
serv come.

42:11 We are all one man' sons; we are true men, thi servant are no
spies.

42:12 and he said unto them, nay, but to see the naked of the land
y are come.

42:13 and they said, thi servant are twelv brethren, the son of one
man in the land of canaan; and, behold, the youngest is thi day with
our father, and one is not.

42:14 and joseph said unto them, that is it that I spake unto you,
saying, Ye are spies: 42:15 herebi ye shall be proved: By the life of
pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come
hither.

42:16 send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be
kept in prison, that your word may be proved, whether there be any
truth in you: or els by the life of pharaoh sure ye are spies.

42:17 and he put them all togeth into ward three days.

42:18 and joseph said unto them the third day, thi do, and live; for
i fear god: 42:19 If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound
in the hous of your prison: go ye, carri corn for the famin of your
houses: 42:20 but bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your
word be verified, and ye shall not die. and they did so.

42:21 and they said one to another, We are verili guilti concerning
our brother, in that we saw the anguish of hi soul, when he besought
us, and we would not hear; therefor is thi distress come upon us.

42:22 and reuben answer them, saying, spake I not unto you, saying,
do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore,
behold, also hi blood is required.

42:23 and they knew not that joseph understood them; for he spake unto
them by an interpreter.

42:24 and he turn himself about from them, and wept; and return to
them again, and commun with them, and took from them simeon, and
bound him befor their eyes.

42:25 then joseph command to fill their sack with corn, and to
restor everi man' money into hi sack, and to give them provision
for the way: and thu did he unto them.

42:26 and they lade their ass with the corn, and depart thence.

42:27 and as one of them open hi sack to give hi ass provend in
th inn, he espi hi money; for, behold, it wa in hi sack' mouth.

42:28 and he said unto hi brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it
i even in my sack: and their heart fail them, and they were afraid,
say one to another, what is thi that god hath done unto us?  42:29
and they came unto jacob their father unto the land of canaan, and
told him all that befel unto them; saying, 42:30 the man, who is the
lord of the land, spake roughli to us, and took us for spi of the
country.

42:31 and we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies: 42:32 we
b twelv brethren, son of our father; one is not, and the youngest
i thi day with our father in the land of canaan.

42:33 and the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, herebi shall
i know that ye are true men; leav one of your brethren here with me,
and take food for the famin of your households, and be gone: 42:34
and bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye are
no spies, but that ye are true men: so will I deliv you your
brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.

42:35 and it came to pass as they empti their sacks, that, behold,
everi man' bundl of money wa in hi sack: and when both they and
their father saw the bundl of money, they were afraid.

42:36 and jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereav of my
children: joseph is not, and simeon is not, and ye will take benjamin
away: all these thing are against me.

42:37 and reuben spake unto hi father, saying, slay my two sons, if i
br him not to thee: deliv him into my hand, and I will bring him
to thee again.

42:38 and he said, My son shall not go down with you; for hi brother
i dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befal him by the way in
th which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hair with sorrow to
th grave.

43:1 and the famin wa sore in the land.

43:2 and it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they
had brought out of egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy
u a littl food.

43:3 and judah spake unto him, saying, the man did solemnli protest
unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with
you.

43:4 If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy
the food: 43:5 but if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down:
for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your
broth be with you.

43:6 and israel said, wherefor dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell
th man whether ye had yet a brother?  43:7 and they said, the man
ask us straitli of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your
fath yet alive? have ye anoth brother? and we told him according
to the tenor of these words: could we certainli know that he would
say, bring your brother down?  43:8 and judah said unto israel his
father, send the lad with me, and we will aris and go; that we may
live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our littl ones.

43:9 I will be sureti for him; of my hand shalt thou requir him: if i
br him not unto thee, and set him befor thee, then let me bear the
blam for ever: 43:10 for except we had lingered, sure now we had
return thi second time.

43:11 and their father israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do
this; take of the best fruit in the land in your vessels, and carry
down the man a present, a littl balm, and a littl honey, spices, and
myrrh, nuts, and almonds: 43:12 and take doubl money in your hand;
and the money that wa brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry
it again in your hand; peradventur it wa an oversight: 43:13 take
also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: 43:14 and god
almighti give you merci befor the man, that he may send away your
oth brother, and benjamin. If I be bereav of my children, I am
bereaved.

43:15 and the men took that present, and they took doubl money in
their hand and benjamin; and rose up, and went down to egypt, and
stood befor joseph.

43:16 and when joseph saw benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of
hi house, bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these
men shall dine with me at noon.

43:17 and the man did as joseph bade; and the man brought the men into
joseph' house.

43:18 and the men were afraid, becaus they were brought into joseph's
house; and they said, becaus of the money that wa return in our
sack at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion
against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.

43:19 and they came near to the steward of joseph' house, and they
commun with him at the door of the house, 43:20 and said, O sir, we
cam inde down at the first time to buy food: 43:21 and it came to
pass, when we came to the inn, that we open our sacks, and, behold,
everi man' money wa in the mouth of hi sack, our money in full
weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.

43:22 and other money have we brought down in our hand to buy food:
w cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

43:23 and he said, peac be to you, fear not: your god, and the god of
your father, hath given you treasur in your sacks: I had your money.
and he brought simeon out unto them.

43:24 and the man brought the men into joseph' house, and gave them
water, and they wash their feet; and he gave their ass provender.

43:25 and they made readi the present against joseph came at noon: for
they heard that they should eat bread there.

43:26 and when joseph came home, they brought him the present which
wa in their hand into the house, and bow themselv to him to the
earth.

43:27 and he ask them of their welfare, and said, Is your father
well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?  43:28 and they
answered, thi servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive.
and they bow down their heads, and made obeisance.

43:29 and he lift up hi eyes, and saw hi brother benjamin, his
mother' son, and said, Is thi your younger brother, of whom ye spake
unto me? and he said, god be graciou unto thee, my son.

43:30 and joseph made haste; for hi bowel did yearn upon his
brother: and he sought where to weep; and he enter into hi chamber,
and wept there.

43:31 and he wash hi face, and went out, and refrain himself, and
said, set on bread.

43:32 and they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves,
and for the egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because
th egyptian might not eat bread with the hebrews; for that is an
abomin unto the egyptians.

43:33 and they sat befor him, the firstborn accord to his
birthright, and the youngest accord to hi youth: and the men
marvel one at another.

43:34 and he took and sent mess unto them from befor him: but
benjamin' mess wa five time so much as ani of their's. and they
drank, and were merri with him.

44:1 and he command the steward of hi house, saying, fill the men's
sack with food, as much as they can carry, and put everi man' money
in hi sack' mouth.

44:2 and put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack' mouth of the
youngest, and hi corn money. and he did accord to the word that
joseph had spoken.

44:3 As soon as the morn wa light, the men were sent away, they
and their asses.

44:4 and when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off,
joseph said unto hi steward, up, follow after the men; and when thou
dost overtak them, say unto them, wherefor have ye reward evil for
good?  44:5 Is not thi it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby
inde he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

44:6 and he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.

44:7 and they said unto him, wherefor saith my lord these words? god
forbid that thi servant should do accord to thi thing: 44:8
behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought
again unto thee out of the land of canaan: how then should we steal
out of thi lord' hous silver or gold?  44:9 with whomsoev of thy
serv it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's
bondmen.

44:10 and he said, now also let it be accord unto your words: he
with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.

44:11 then they speedili took down everi man hi sack to the ground,
and open everi man hi sack.

44:12 and he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the
youngest: and the cup wa found in benjamin' sack.

44:13 then they rent their clothes, and lade everi man hi ass, and
return to the city.

44:14 and judah and hi brethren came to joseph' house; for he was
yet there: and they fell befor him on the ground.

44:15 and joseph said unto them, what deed is thi that ye have done?
wot ye not that such a man as I can certainli divine?  44:16 and judah
said, what shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?  or how
shal we clear ourselves? god hath found out the iniqu of thy
servants: behold, we are my lord' servants, both we, and he also with
whom the cup is found.

44:17 and he said, god forbid that I should do so: but the man in
whos hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you,
get you up in peac unto your father.

44:18 then judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy
servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord' ears, and let not
thin anger burn against thi servant: for thou art even as pharaoh.

44:19 My lord ask hi servants, saying, have ye a father, or a
brother?  44:20 and we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old
man, and a child of hi old age, a littl one; and hi brother is
dead, and he alon is left of hi mother, and hi father loveth him.

44:21 and thou saidst unto thi servants, bring him down unto me, that
i may set mine eye upon him.

44:22 and we said unto my lord, the lad cannot leav hi father: for
if he should leav hi father, hi father would die.

44:23 and thou saidst unto thi servants, except your youngest brother
com down with you, ye shall see my face no more.

44:24 and it came to pass when we came up unto thi servant my father,
w told him the word of my lord.

44:25 and our father said, Go again, and buy us a littl food.

44:26 and we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with
us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man' face, except
our youngest brother be with us.

44:27 and thi servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife
bar me two sons: 44:28 and the one went out from me, and I said,
sur he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since: 44:29 and if ye
tak thi also from me, and mischief befal him, ye shall bring down
mi gray hair with sorrow to the grave.

44:30 now therefor when I come to thi servant my father, and the lad
b not with us; see that hi life is bound up in the lad' life;
44:31 It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with
us, that he will die: and thi servant shall bring down the gray hairs
of thi servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

44:32 for thi servant becam sureti for the lad unto my father,
saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to
mi father for ever.

44:33 now therefore, I pray thee, let thi servant abid instead of the
lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with hi brethren.

44:34 for how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me?
lest peradventur I see the evil that shall come on my father.

45:1 then joseph could not refrain himself befor all them that stood
bi him; and he cried, caus everi man to go out from me. and there
stood no man with him, while joseph made himself known unto his
brethren.

45:2 and he wept aloud: and the egyptian and the hous of pharaoh
heard.

45:3 and joseph said unto hi brethren, I am joseph; doth my father
yet live? and hi brethren could not answer him; for they were
troubl at hi presence.

45:4 and joseph said unto hi brethren, come near to me, I pray you.
and they came near. and he said, I am joseph your brother, whom ye
sold into egypt.

45:5 now therefor be not grieved, nor angri with yourselves, that ye
sold me hither: for god did send me befor you to preserv life.

45:6 for these two year hath the famin been in the land: and yet
ther are five years, in the which there shall neither be ear nor
harvest.

45:7 and god sent me befor you to preserv you a poster in the
earth, and to save your live by a great deliverance.

45:8 So now it wa not you that sent me hither, but god: and he hath
mad me a father to pharaoh, and lord of all hi house, and a ruler
throughout all the land of egypt.

45:9 hast ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, thu saith
thi son joseph, god hath made me lord of all egypt: come down unto me,
tarri not: 45:10 and thou shalt dwell in the land of goshen, and thou
shalt be near unto me, thou, and thi children, and thi children's
children, and thi flocks, and thi herds, and all that thou hast: 45:11
and there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five year of famine;
lest thou, and thi household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.

45:12 and, behold, your eye see, and the eye of my brother benjamin,
that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.

45:13 and ye shall tell my father of all my glori in egypt, and of all
that ye have seen; and ye shall hast and bring down my father hither.

45:14 and he fell upon hi brother benjamin' neck, and wept; and
benjamin wept upon hi neck.

45:15 moreov he kiss all hi brethren, and wept upon them: and
aft that hi brethren talk with him.

45:16 and the fame thereof wa heard in pharaoh' house, saying,
joseph' brethren are come: and it pleas pharaoh well, and his
servants.

45:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, say unto thi brethren, thi do ye;
lad your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of canaan; 45:18 and
tak your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will
giv you the good of the land of egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of
th land.

45:19 now thou art commanded, thi do ye; take you wagon out of the
land of egypt for your littl ones, and for your wives, and bring your
father, and come.

45:20 also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of
egypt is your's.

45:21 and the children of israel did so: and joseph gave them wagons,
accord to the command of pharaoh, and gave them provis for
th way.

45:22 To all of them he gave each man chang of raiment; but to
benjamin he gave three hundr piec of silver, and five chang of
raiment.

45:23 and to hi father he sent after thi manner; ten ass laden
with the good thing of egypt, and ten she ass laden with corn and
bread and meat for hi father by the way.

45:24 So he sent hi brethren away, and they departed: and he said
unto them, see that ye fall not out by the way.

45:25 and they went up out of egypt, and came into the land of canaan
unto jacob their father, 45:26 and told him, saying, joseph is yet
alive, and he is governor over all the land of egypt. and jacob's
heart fainted, for he believ them not.

45:27 and they told him all the word of joseph, which he had said
unto them: and when he saw the wagon which joseph had sent to carry
him, the spirit of jacob their father revived: 45:28 and israel said,
it is enough; joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before
i die.

46:1 and israel took hi journey with all that he had, and came to
beersheba, and offer sacrific unto the god of hi father isaac.

46:2 and god spake unto israel in the vision of the night, and said,
jacob, jacob. and he said, here am i.

46:3 and he said, I am god, the god of thi father: fear not to go down
into egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 I will
go down with thee into egypt; and I will also sure bring thee up
again: and joseph shall put hi hand upon thine eyes.

46:5 and jacob rose up from beersheba: and the son of israel carried
jacob their father, and their littl ones, and their wives, in the
wagon which pharaoh had sent to carri him.

46:6 and they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had
gotten in the land of canaan, and came into egypt, jacob, and all his
se with him: 46:7 hi sons, and hi sons' son with him, his
daughters, and hi sons' daughters, and all hi seed brought he with
him into egypt.

46:8 and these are the name of the children of israel, which came
into egypt, jacob and hi sons: reuben, jacob' firstborn.

46:9 and the son of reuben; hanoch, and phallu, and hezron, and
carmi.

46:10 and the son of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin,
and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman.

46:11 and the son of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

46:12 and the son of judah; er, and onan, and shelah, and pharez, and
zarah: but Er and onan die in the land of canaan. and the son of
pharez were hezron and hamul.

46:13 and the son of issachar; tola, and phuvah, and job, and
shimron.

46:14 and the son of zebulun; sered, and elon, and jahleel.

46:15 these be the son of leah, which she bare unto jacob in
padanaram, with hi daughter dinah: all the soul of hi son and his
daught were thirti and three.

46:16 and the son of gad; ziphion, and haggi, shuni, and ezbon, eri,
and arodi, and areli.

46:17 and the son of asher; jimnah, and ishuah, and isui, and beriah,
and serah their sister: and the son of beriah; heber, and malchiel.

46:18 these are the son of zilpah, whom laban gave to leah his
daughter, and these she bare unto jacob, even sixteen souls.

46:19 the son of rachel jacob' wife; joseph, and benjamin.

46:20 and unto joseph in the land of egypt were born manasseh and
ephraim, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of On bare
unto him.

46:21 and the son of benjamin were belah, and becher, and ashbel,
gera, and naaman, ehi, and rosh, muppim, and huppim, and ard.

46:22 these are the son of rachel, which were born to jacob: all the
soul were fourteen.

46:23 and the son of dan; hushim.

46:24 and the son of naphtali; jahzeel, and guni, and jezer, and
shillem.

46:25 these are the son of bilhah, which laban gave unto rachel his
daughter, and she bare these unto jacob: all the soul were seven.

46:26 all the soul that came with jacob into egypt, which came out of
hi loins, besid jacob' sons' wives, all the soul were threescore
and six; 46:27 and the son of joseph, which were born him in egypt,
wer two souls: all the soul of the hous of jacob, which came into
egypt, were threescor and ten.

46:28 and he sent judah befor him unto joseph, to direct hi face
unto goshen; and they came into the land of goshen.

46:29 and joseph made readi hi chariot, and went up to meet israel
hi father, to goshen, and present himself unto him; and he fell on
hi neck, and wept on hi neck a good while.

46:30 and israel said unto joseph, now let me die, sinc I have seen
thi face, becaus thou art yet alive.

46:31 and joseph said unto hi brethren, and unto hi father' house,
i will go up, and shew pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my
father' house, which were in the land of canaan, are come unto me;
46:32 and the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed
cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all
that they have.

46:33 and it shall come to pass, when pharaoh shall call you, and
shal say, what is your occupation?  46:34 that ye shall say, thy
servants' trade hath been about cattl from our youth even until now,
both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of
goshen; for everi shepherd is an abomin unto the egyptians.

47:1 then joseph came and told pharaoh, and said, My father and my
brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have,
ar come out of the land of canaan; and, behold, they are in the land
of goshen.

47:2 and he took some of hi brethren, even five men, and presented
them unto pharaoh.

47:3 and pharaoh said unto hi brethren, what is your occupation? and
they said unto pharaoh, thi servant are shepherds, both we, and also
our fathers.

47:4 they said morev unto pharaoh, for to sojourn in the land are we
come; for thi servant have no pastur for their flocks; for the
famin is sore in the land of canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let
thi servant dwell in the land of goshen.

47:5 and pharaoh spake unto joseph, saying, thi father and thy
brethren are come unto thee: 47:6 the land of egypt is befor thee; in
th best of the land make thi father and brethren to dwell; in the
land of goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest ani men of activity
among them, then make them ruler over my cattle.

47:7 and joseph brought in jacob hi father, and set him before
pharaoh: and jacob bless pharaoh.

47:8 and pharaoh said unto jacob, how old art thou?  47:9 and jacob
said unto pharaoh, the day of the year of my pilgrimag are an
hundr and thirti years: few and evil have the day of the year of
mi life been, and have not attain unto the day of the year of the
lif of my father in the day of their pilgrimage.

47:10 and jacob bless pharaoh, and went out from befor pharaoh.

47:11 and joseph place hi father and hi brethren, and gave them a
possess in the land of egypt, in the best of the land, in the land
of rameses, as pharaoh had commanded.

47:12 and joseph nourish hi father, and hi brethren, and all his
father' household, with bread, accord to their families.

47:13 and there wa no bread in all the land; for the famin wa very
sore, so that the land of egypt and all the land of canaan faint by
reason of the famine.

47:14 and joseph gather up all the money that wa found in the land
of egypt, and in the land of canaan, for the corn which they bought:
and joseph brought the money into pharaoh' house.

47:15 and when money fail in the land of egypt, and in the land of
canaan, all the egyptian came unto joseph, and said, give us bread:
for whi should we die in thi presence? for the money faileth.

47:16 and joseph said, give your cattle; and I will give you for your
cattle, if money fail.

47:17 and they brought their cattl unto joseph: and joseph gave them
bread in exchang for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle
of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all
their cattl for that year.

47:18 when that year wa ended, they came unto him the second year,
and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our
money is spent; my lord also hath our herd of cattle; there is not
ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
47:19 wherefor shall we die befor thine eyes, both we and our land?
buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants
unto pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that
th land be not desolate.

47:20 and joseph bought all the land of egypt for pharaoh; for the
egyptian sold everi man hi field, becaus the famin prevail over
them: so the land becam pharaoh's.

47:21 and as for the people, he remov them to citi from one end of
th border of egypt even to the other end thereof.

47:22 onli the land of the priest bought he not; for the priest had
a portion assign them of pharaoh, and did eat their portion which
pharaoh gave them: wherefor they sold not their lands.

47:23 then joseph said unto the people, behold, I have bought you this
day and your land for pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall
sow the land.

47:24 and it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give
th fifth part unto pharaoh, and four part shall be your own, for
se of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households,
and for food for your littl ones.

47:25 and they said, thou hast save our lives: let us find grace in
th sight of my lord, and we will be pharaoh' servants.

47:26 and joseph made it a law over the land of egypt unto thi day,
that pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the
priest only, which becam not pharaoh's.

47:27 and israel dwelt in the land of egypt, in the countri of goshen;
and they had possess therein, and grew, and multiplied
exceedingly.

47:28 and jacob live in the land of egypt seventeen years: so the
whol age of jacob wa an hundr forti and seven years.

47:29 and the time drew nigh that israel must die: and he call his
son joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thi sight,
put, I pray thee, thi hand under my thigh, and deal kindli and truly
with me; buri me not, I pray thee, in egypt: 47:30 but I will lie with
mi fathers, and thou shalt carri me out of egypt, and buri me in their
buryingplace. and he said, I will do as thou hast said.

47:31 and he said, swear unto me. and he sware unto him. and israel
bow himself upon the bed' head.

48:1 and it came to pass after these things, that one told joseph,
behold, thi father is sick: and he took with him hi two sons,
manasseh and ephraim.

48:2 and one told jacob, and said, behold, thi son joseph cometh unto
thee: and israel strengthen himself, and sat upon the bed.

48:3 and jacob said unto joseph, god almighti appear unto me at luz
in the land of canaan, and bless me, 48:4 and said unto me, behold,
i will make thee fruitful, and multipli thee, and I will make of thee
a multitud of people; and will give thi land to thi seed after thee
for an everlast possession.

48:5 and now thi two sons, ephraim and manasseh, which were born unto
the in the land of egypt befor I came unto thee into egypt, are
mine; as reuben and simeon, they shall be mine.

48:6 and thi issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine,
and shall be call after the name of their brethren in their
inheritance.

48:7 and as for me, when I came from padan, rachel die by me in the
land of canaan in the way, when yet there wa but a littl way to come
unto ephrath: and I buri her there in the way of ephrath; the same
i bethlehem.

48:8 and israel beheld joseph' sons, and said, who are these?  48:9
and joseph said unto hi father, they are my sons, whom god hath given
m in thi place. and he said, bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and i
wil bless them.

48:10 now the eye of israel were dim for age, so that he could not
see.

and he brought them near unto him; and he kiss them, and embraced
them.

48:11 and israel said unto joseph, I had not thought to see thi face:
and, lo, god hath shew me also thi seed.

48:12 and joseph brought them out from between hi knees, and he bowed
himself with hi face to the earth.

48:13 and joseph took them both, ephraim in hi right hand toward
israel' left hand, and manasseh in hi left hand toward israel's
right hand, and brought them near unto him.

48:14 and israel stretch out hi right hand, and laid it upon
ephraim' head, who wa the younger, and hi left hand upon manasseh's
head, guid hi hand wittingly; for manasseh wa the firstborn.

48:15 and he bless joseph, and said, god, befor whom my fathers
abraham and isaac did walk, the god which fed me all my life long unto
thi day, 48:16 the angel which redeem me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be name on them, and the name of my fathers
abraham and isaac; and let them grow into a multitud in the midst of
th earth.

48:17 and when joseph saw that hi father laid hi right hand upon the
head of ephraim, it displeas him: and he held up hi father' hand,
to remov it from ephraim' head unto manasseh' head.

48:18 and joseph said unto hi father, not so, my father: for thi is
th firstborn; put thi right hand upon hi head.

48:19 and hi father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it:
h also shall becom a people, and he also shall be great: but truly
hi younger brother shall be greater than he, and hi seed shall
becom a multitud of nations.

48:20 and he bless them that day, saying, In thee shall israel
bless, saying, god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh: and he set
ephraim befor manasseh.

48:21 and israel said unto joseph, behold, I die: but god shall be
with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

48:22 moreov I have given to thee one portion abov thi brethren,
which I took out of the hand of the amorit with my sword and with my
bow.

49:1 and jacob call unto hi sons, and said, gather yourselves
together, that I may tell you that which shall befal you in the last
days.

49:2 gather yourselv together, and hear, ye son of jacob; and
hearken unto israel your father.

49:3 reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the begin of my
strength, the excel of dignity, and the excel of power: 49:4
unstabl as water, thou shalt not excel; becaus thou wentest up to
thi father' bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.

49:5 simeon and levi are brethren; instrument of cruelti are in their
habitations.

49:6 O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly,
min honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man,
and in their selfwil they dig down a wall.

49:7 curs be their anger, for it wa fierce; and their wrath, for it
wa cruel: I will divid them in jacob, and scatter them in israel.

49:8 judah, thou art he whom thi brethren shall praise: thi hand shall
b in the neck of thine enemies; thi father' children shall bow down
befor thee.

49:9 judah is a lion' whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up:
h stoop down, he couch as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall
rous him up?  49:10 the sceptr shall not depart from judah, nor a
lawgiv from between hi feet, until shiloh come; and unto him shall
th gather of the peopl be.

49:11 bind hi foal unto the vine, and hi ass' colt unto the
choic vine; he wash hi garment in wine, and hi cloth in the
blood of grapes: 49:12 hi eye shall be red with wine, and hi teeth
whit with milk.

49:13 zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for
an haven of ships; and hi border shall be unto zidon.

49:14 issachar is a strong ass couch down between two burdens:
49:15 and he saw that rest wa good, and the land that it was
pleasant; and bow hi shoulder to bear, and becam a servant unto
tribute.

49:16 dan shall judg hi people, as one of the tribe of israel.

49:17 dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that
biteth the hors heels, so that hi rider shall fall backward.

49:18 I have wait for thi salvation, O lord.

49:19 gad, a troop shall overcom him: but he shall overcom at the
last.

49:20 out of asher hi bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.

49:21 naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodli words.

49:22 joseph is a fruit bough, even a fruit bough by a well;
whos branch run over the wall: 49:23 the archer have sorely
griev him, and shot at him, and hate him: 49:24 but hi bow abode
in strength, and the arm of hi hand were made strong by the hands
of the mighti god of jacob; (from thenc is the shepherd, the stone of
israel:) 49:25 even by the god of thi father, who shall help thee; and
bi the almighty, who shall bless thee with bless of heaven above,
bless of the deep that lieth under, bless of the breasts, and
of the womb: 49:26 the bless of thi father have prevail above
th bless of my progenitor unto the utmost bound of the
everlast hills: they shall be on the head of joseph, and on the
crown of the head of him that wa separ from hi brethren.

49:27 benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morn he shall devour
th prey, and at night he shall divid the spoil.

49:28 all these are the twelv tribe of israel: and thi is it that
their father spake unto them, and bless them; everi one accord to
hi bless he bless them.

49:29 and he charg them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered
unto my people: buri me with my father in the cave that is in the
field of ephron the hittite, 49:30 In the cave that is in the field of
machpelah, which is befor mamre, in the land of canaan, which abraham
bought with the field of ephron the hittit for a possess of a
buryingplace.

49:31 there they buri abraham and sarah hi wife; there they buried
isaac and rebekah hi wife; and there I buri leah.

49:32 the purchas of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of heth.

49:33 and when jacob had made an end of command hi sons, he
gath up hi feet into the bed, and yield up the ghost, and was
gath unto hi people.

50:1 and joseph fell upon hi father' face, and wept upon him, and
kiss him.

50:2 and joseph command hi servant the physician to embalm his
father: and the physician embalm israel.

50:3 and forti day were fulfil for him; for so are fulfil the
day of those which are embalmed: and the egyptian mourn for him
threescor and ten days.

50:4 and when the day of hi mourn were past, joseph spake unto
th hous of pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes,
speak, I pray you, in the ear of pharaoh, saying, 50:5 My father made
m swear, saying, lo, I die: in my grave which I have dig for me in
th land of canaan, there shalt thou buri me. now therefor let me go
up, I pray thee, and buri my father, and I will come again.

50:6 and pharaoh said, Go up, and buri thi father, accord as he
mad thee swear.

50:7 and joseph went up to buri hi father: and with him went up all
th servant of pharaoh, the elder of hi house, and all the elders
of the land of egypt, 50:8 and all the hous of joseph, and his
brethren, and hi father' house: onli their littl ones, and their
flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of goshen.

50:9 and there went up with him both chariot and horsemen: and it was
a veri great company.

50:10 and they came to the threshingfloor of atad, which is beyond
jordan, and there they mourn with a great and veri sore lamentation:
and he made a mourn for hi father seven days.

50:11 and when the inhabit of the land, the canaanites, saw the
mourn in the floor of atad, they said, thi is a grievou mourning
to the egyptians: wherefor the name of it wa call abelmizraim,
which is beyond jordan.

50:12 and hi son did unto him accord as he command them: 50:13
for hi son carri him into the land of canaan, and buri him in
th cave of the field of machpelah, which abraham bought with the
field for a possess of a buryingplac of ephron the hittite, before
mamre.

50:14 and joseph return into egypt, he, and hi brethren, and all
that went up with him to buri hi father, after he had buri his
father.

50:15 and when joseph' brethren saw that their father wa dead, they
said, joseph will peradventur hate us, and will certainli requit us
al the evil which we did unto him.

50:16 and they sent a messeng unto joseph, saying, thi father did
command befor he died, saying, 50:17 So shall ye say unto joseph,
forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thi brethren, and their sin;
for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgiv the
trespass of the servant of the god of thi father. and joseph wept
when they spake unto him.

50:18 and hi brethren also went and fell down befor hi face; and
they said, behold, we be thi servants.

50:19 and joseph said unto them, fear not: for am I in the place of
god?  50:20 but as for you, ye thought evil against me; but god meant
it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is thi day, to save much people
alive.

50:21 now therefor fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little
ones.

and he comfort them, and spake kindli unto them.

50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and hi father' house: and
joseph live an hundr and ten years.

50:23 and joseph saw ephraim' children of the third generation: the
children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon
joseph' knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto hi brethren, I die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of thi land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
wil sure visit you, and ye shall carri up my bone from hence.

50:26 So joseph died, be an hundr and ten year old: and they
embalm him, and he wa put in a coffin in egypt.




th second book of moses:  call exodus


1:1 now these are the name of the children of israel, which came
into egypt; everi man and hi household came with jacob.

1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and judah, 1:3 issachar, zebulun, and
benjamin, 1:4 dan, and naphtali, gad, and asher.

1:5 and all the soul that came out of the loin of jacob were seventy
souls: for joseph wa in egypt already.

1:6 and joseph died, and all hi brethren, and all that generation.

1:7 and the children of israel were fruitful, and increased
abundantly, and multiplied, and wax exceed mighty; and the land
wa fill with them.

1:8 now there aros up a new king over egypt, which knew not joseph.

1:9 and he said unto hi people, behold, the peopl of the children of
israel are more and mightier than we: 1:10 come on, let us deal wisely
with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there
falleth out ani war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight
against us, and so get them up out of the land.

1:11 therefor they did set over them taskmast to afflict them with
their burdens. and they built for pharaoh treasur cities, pithom and
raamses.

1:12 but the more they afflict them, the more they multipli and
grew.

and they were griev becaus of the children of israel.

1:13 and the egyptian made the children of israel to serv with
rigour: 1:14 and they made their live bitter with hard bondage, in
morter, and in brick, and in all manner of servic in the field: all
their service, wherein they made them serve, wa with rigour.

1:15 and the king of egypt spake to the hebrew midwives, of which the
nam of the one wa shiphrah, and the name of the other puah: 1:16 and
h said, when ye do the offic of a midwif to the hebrew women, and
se them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but
if it be a daughter, then she shall live.

1:17 but the midwiv fear god, and did not as the king of egypt
command them, but save the men children alive.

1:18 and the king of egypt call for the midwives, and said unto
them, whi have ye done thi thing, and have save the men children
alive?  1:19 and the midwiv said unto pharaoh, becaus the hebrew
women are not as the egyptian women; for they are lively, and are
deliv ere the midwiv come in unto them.

1:20 therefor god dealt well with the midwives: and the people
multiplied, and wax veri mighty.

1:21 and it came to pass, becaus the midwiv fear god, that he
mad them houses.

1:22 and pharaoh charg all hi people, saying, everi son that is
born ye shall cast into the river, and everi daughter ye shall save
alive.

2:1 and there went a man of the hous of levi, and took to wife a
daught of levi.

2:2 and the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that
h wa a goodli child, she hid him three months.

2:3 and when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of
bulrushes, and daub it with slime and with pitch, and put the child
therein; and she laid it in the flag by the river' brink.

2:4 and hi sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

2:5 and the daughter of pharaoh came down to wash herself at the
river; and her maiden walk along by the river' side; and when she
saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

2:6 and when she had open it, she saw the child: and, behold, the
bab wept. and she had compass on him, and said, thi is one of the
hebrews' children.

2:7 then said hi sister to pharaoh' daughter, shall I go and call to
the a nurs of the hebrew women, that she may nurs the child for
thee?  2:8 and pharaoh' daughter said to her, go. and the maid went
and call the child' mother.

2:9 and pharaoh' daughter said unto her, take thi child away, and
nurs it for me, and I will give thee thi wages. and the women took
th child, and nurs it.

2:10 and the child grew, and she brought him unto pharaoh' daughter,
and he becam her son. and she call hi name moses: and she said,
becaus I drew him out of the water.

2:11 and it came to pass in those days, when mose wa grown, that he
went out unto hi brethren, and look on their burdens: and he spied
an egyptian smite an hebrew, one of hi brethren.

2:12 and he look thi way and that way, and when he saw that there
wa no man, he slew the egyptian, and hid him in the sand.

2:13 and when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the
hebrew strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong,
wherefor smitest thou thi fellow?  2:14 and he said, who made thee a
princ and a judg over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou
killedst the egyptian? and mose feared, and said, sure thi thing
i known.

2:15 now when pharaoh heard thi thing, he sought to slay moses. but
mos fled from the face of pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of midian:
and he sat down by a well.

2:16 now the priest of midian had seven daughters: and they came and
drew water, and fill the trough to water their father' flock.

2:17 and the shepherd came and drove them away: but mose stood up
and help them, and water their flock.

2:18 and when they came to reuel their father, he said, how is it that
y are come so soon to day?  2:19 and they said, An egyptian delivered
u out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for
us, and water the flock.

2:20 and he said unto hi daughters, and where is he? whi is it that
y have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

2:21 and mose wa content to dwell with the man: and he gave moses
zipporah hi daughter.

2:22 and she bare him a son, and he call hi name gershom: for he
said, I have been a stranger in a strang land.

2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt
died: and the children of israel sigh by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cri came up unto god by reason of the bondage.

2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god rememb hi covenant
with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob.

2:25 and god look upon the children of israel, and god had respect
unto them.

3:1 now mose kept the flock of jethro hi father in law, the priest
of midian: and he led the flock to the backsid of the desert, and
cam to the mountain of god, even to horeb.

3:2 and the angel of the lord appear unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush wa not consumed.

3:3 and mose said, I will now turn aside, and see thi great sight,
whi the bush is not burnt.

3:4 and when the lord saw that he turn asid to see, god call unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said,
her am i.

3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thi shoe from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holi ground.

3:6 moreov he said, I am the god of thi father, the god of abraham,
th god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and mose hid hi face; for he
wa afraid to look upon god.

3:7 and the lord said, I have sure seen the afflict of my people
which are in egypt, and have heard their cri by reason of their
taskmasters; for I know their sorrows; 3:8 and I am come down to
deliv them out of the hand of the egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites, and the
hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and
th jebusites.

3:9 now therefore, behold, the cri of the children of israel is come
unto me: and I have also seen the oppress wherewith the egyptians
oppress them.

3:10 come now therefore, and I will send thee unto pharaoh, that thou
mayest bring forth my peopl the children of israel out of egypt.

3:11 and mose said unto god, who am I, that I should go unto pharaoh,
and that I should bring forth the children of israel out of egypt?
3:12 and he said, certainli I will be with thee; and thi shall be a
token unto thee, that I have sent thee: when thou hast brought forth
th peopl out of egypt, ye shall serv god upon thi mountain.

3:13 and mose said unto god, behold, when I come unto the children of
israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your father hath sent me
unto you; and they shall say to me, what is hi name? what shall I say
unto them?  3:14 and god said unto moses, I AM that I am: and he said,
thu shalt thou say unto the children of israel, I AM hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 and god said moreov unto moses, thu shalt thou say unto the
children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham,
th god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: thi is
mi name for ever, and thi is my memori unto all generations.

3:16 go, and gather the elder of israel together, and say unto them,
th lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of
jacob, appear unto me, saying, I have sure visit you, and seen
that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and I have said, I will bring
you up out of the afflict of egypt unto the land of the canaanites,
and the hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the
hivites, and the jebusites, unto a land flow with milk and honey.

3:18 and they shall hearken to thi voice: and thou shalt come, thou
and the elder of israel, unto the king of egypt, and ye shall say
unto him, the lord god of the hebrew hath met with us: and now let us
go, we beseech thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we
may sacrific to the lord our god.

3:19 and I am sure that the king of egypt will not let you go, no, not
bi a mighti hand.

3:20 and I will stretch out my hand, and smite egypt with all my
wond which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will
let you go.

3:21 and I will give thi peopl favour in the sight of the egyptians:
and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.

3:22 but everi woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that
sojourneth in her house, jewel of silver, and jewel of gold, and
raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your
daughters; and ye shall spoil the egyptians.

4:1 and mose answer and said, but, behold, they will not believe
me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, the lord hath not
appear unto thee.

4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
said, A rod.

4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
and it becam a serpent; and mose fled from befor it.

4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
th tail. and he put forth hi hand, and caught it, and it becam a
rod in hi hand: 4:5 that they may believ that the lord god of their
fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob,
hath appear unto thee.

4:6 and the lord said furthermor unto him, put now thine hand into
thi bosom. and he put hi hand into hi bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, hi hand wa leprou as snow.

4:7 and he said, put thine hand into thi bosom again. and he put his
hand into hi bosom again; and pluck it out of hi bosom, and,
behold, it wa turn again as hi other flesh.

4:8 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believ thee, neither
hearken to the voic of the first sign, that they will believ the
voic of the latter sign.

4:9 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believ also these two
signs, neither hearken unto thi voice, that thou shalt take of the
wat of the river, and pour it upon the dri land: and the water which
thou takest out of the river shall becom blood upon the dri land.

4:10 and mose said unto the lord, O my lord, I am not eloquent,
neith heretofore, nor sinc thou hast spoken unto thi servant: but i
am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

4:11 and the lord said unto him, who hath made man' mouth? or who
maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the
lord?  4:12 now therefor go, and I will be with thi mouth, and teach
the what thou shalt say.

4:13 and he said, O my lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him
whom thou wilt send.

4:14 and the anger of the lord wa kindl against moses, and he said,
i not aaron the levit thi brother? I know that he can speak well.
and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth
thee, he will be glad in hi heart.

4:15 and thou shalt speak unto him, and put word in hi mouth: and i
wil be with thi mouth, and with hi mouth, and will teach you what ye
shal do.

4:16 and he shall be thi spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
instead of god.

4:17 and thou shalt take thi rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt
do signs.

4:18 and mose went and return to jethro hi father in law, and said
unto him, let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which
ar in egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. and jethro said to
moses, Go in peace.

4:19 and the lord said unto mose in midian, go, return into egypt:
for all the men are dead which sought thi life.

4:20 and mose took hi wife and hi sons, and set them upon an ass,
and he return to the land of egypt: and mose took the rod of god in
hi hand.

4:21 and the lord said unto moses, when thou goest to return into
egypt, see that thou do all those wonder befor pharaoh, which I have
put in thine hand: but I will harden hi heart, that he shall not let
th peopl go.

4:22 and thou shalt say unto pharaoh, thu saith the lord, israel is
mi son, even my firstborn: 4:23 and I say unto thee, let my son go,
that he may serv me: and if thou refus to let him go, behold, I will
slay thi son, even thi firstborn.

4:24 and it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the lord met him,
and sought to kill him.

4:25 then zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at hi feet, and said, sure a bloodi husband art
thou to me.

4:26 So he let him go: then she said, A bloodi husband thou art,
becaus of the circumcision.

4:27 and the lord said to aaron, Go into the wilder to meet moses.
and he went, and met him in the mount of god, and kiss him.

4:28 and mose told aaron all the word of the lord who had sent him,
and all the sign which he had command him.

4:29 and mose and aaron went and gather togeth all the elder of
th children of israel: 4:30 and aaron spake all the word which the
lord had spoken unto moses, and did the sign in the sight of the
people.

4:31 and the peopl believed: and when they heard that the lord had
visit the children of israel, and that he had look upon their
affliction, then they bow their head and worshipped.

5:1 and afterward mose and aaron went in, and told pharaoh, thus
saith the lord god of israel, let my peopl go, that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 and pharaoh said, who is the lord, that I should obey hi voic to
let israel go? I know not the lord, neither will I let israel go.

5:3 and they said, the god of the hebrew hath met with us: let us go,
w pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrific unto
th lord our god; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the
sword.

5:4 and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefor do ye, mose and
aaron, let the peopl from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 and pharaoh said, behold, the peopl of the land now are many, and
y make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 and pharaoh command the same day the taskmast of the people,
and their officers, saying, 5:7 Ye shall no more give the peopl straw
to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

5:8 and the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye
shal lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be
idle; therefor they cry, saying, let us go and sacrific to our god.

5:9 let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour
therein; and let them not regard vain words.

5:10 and the taskmast of the peopl went out, and their officers,
and they spake to the people, saying, thu saith pharaoh, I will not
giv you straw.

5:11 Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your
work shall be diminished.

5:12 So the peopl were scatter abroad throughout all the land of
egypt to gather stubbl instead of straw.

5:13 and the taskmast hast them, saying, fulfil your works, your
daili tasks, as when there wa straw.

5:14 and the offic of the children of israel, which pharaoh's
taskmast had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, wherefore
hav ye not fulfil your task in make brick both yesterday and to
day, as heretofore?  5:15 then the offic of the children of israel
cam and cri unto pharaoh, saying, wherefor dealest thou thu with
thi servants?  5:16 there is no straw given unto thi servants, and
they say to us, make brick: and, behold, thi servant are beaten; but
th fault is in thine own people.

5:17 but he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefor ye say, let us
go and do sacrific to the lord.

5:18 Go therefor now, and work; for there shall no straw be given
you, yet shall ye deliv the tale of bricks.

5:19 and the offic of the children of israel did see that they were
in evil case, after it wa said, Ye shall not minish ought from your
brick of your daili task.

5:20 and they met mose and aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
forth from pharaoh: 5:21 and they said unto them, the lord look upon
you, and judge; becaus ye have made our savour to be abhor in the
ey of pharaoh, and in the eye of hi servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.

5:22 and mose return unto the lord, and said, lord, wherefor hast
thou so evil entreat thi people? whi is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for sinc I came to pharaoh to speak in thi name, he hath done
evil to thi people; neither hast thou deliv thi peopl at all.

6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what I will do
to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of hi land.

6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, I am the lord: 6:3
and I appear unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name
of god almighty, but by my name jehovah wa I not known to them.

6:4 and I have also establish my coven with them, to give them
th land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 and I have also heard the groan of the children of israel, whom
th egyptian keep in bondage; and I have rememb my covenant.

6:6 wherefor say unto the children of israel, I am the lord, and i
wil bring you out from under the burden of the egyptians, and I will
rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and I will take you to me for a
people, and I will be to you a god: and ye shall know that I am the
lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burden of the
egyptians.

6:8 and I will bring you in unto the land, concern the which I did
swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and I will give
it you for an heritage: I am the lord.

6:9 and mose spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto mose for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 Go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of
hi land.

6:12 and mose spake befor the lord, saying, behold, the children of
israel have not hearken unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, who
am of uncircumcis lips?  6:13 and the lord spake unto mose and unto
aaron, and gave them a charg unto the children of israel, and unto
pharaoh king of egypt, to bring the children of israel out of the land
of egypt.

6:14 these be the head of their fathers' houses: the son of reuben
th firstborn of israel; hanoch, and pallu, hezron, and carmi: these
b the famili of reuben.

6:15 and the son of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin,
and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman: these are the
famili of simeon.

6:16 and these are the name of the son of levi accord to their
generations; gershon, and kohath, and merari: and the year of the
lif of levi were an hundr thirti and seven years.

6:17 the son of gershon; libni, and shimi, accord to their
families.

6:18 and the son of kohath; amram, and izhar, and hebron, and uzziel:
and the year of the life of kohath were an hundr thirti and three
years.

6:19 and the son of merari; mahali and mushi: these are the families
of levi accord to their generations.

6:20 and amram took him jocheb hi father' sister to wife; and she
bar him aaron and moses: and the year of the life of amram were an
hundr and thirti and seven years.

6:21 and the son of izhar; korah, and nepheg, and zichri.

6:22 and the son of uzziel; mishael, and elzaphan, and zithri.

6:23 and aaron took him elisheba, daughter of amminadab, sister of
naashon, to wife; and she bare him nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and
ithamar.

6:24 and the son of korah; assir, and elkanah, and abiasaph: these
ar the famili of the korhites.

6:25 and eleazar aaron' son took him one of the daughter of putiel
to wife; and she bare him phinehas: these are the head of the fathers
of the levit accord to their families.

6:26 these are that aaron and moses, to whom the lord said, bring out
th children of israel from the land of egypt accord to their
armies.

6:27 these are they which spake to pharaoh king of egypt, to bring out
th children of israel from egypt: these are that mose and aaron.

6:28 and it came to pass on the day when the lord spake unto mose in
th land of egypt, 6:29 that the lord spake unto moses, saying, I am
th lord: speak thou unto pharaoh king of egypt all that I say unto
thee.

6:30 and mose said befor the lord, behold, I am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall pharaoh hearken unto me?  7:1 and the lord said
unto moses, see, I have made thee a god to pharaoh: and aaron thy
broth shall be thi prophet.

7:2 thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and aaron thi brother
shal speak unto pharaoh, that he send the children of israel out of
hi land.

7:3 and I will harden pharaoh' heart, and multipli my sign and my
wond in the land of egypt.

7:4 but pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand
upon egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my peopl the children of
israel, out of the land of egypt by great judgments.

7:5 and the egyptian shall know that I am the lord, when I stretch
forth mine hand upon egypt, and bring out the children of israel from
among them.

7:6 and mose and aaron did as the lord command them, so did they.

7:7 and mose wa fourscor year old, and aaron fourscor and three
year old, when they spake unto pharaoh.

7:8 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron, saying, 7:9 when
pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, shew a miracl for you: then
thou shalt say unto aaron, take thi rod, and cast it befor pharaoh,
and it shall becom a serpent.

7:10 and mose and aaron went in unto pharaoh, and they did so as the
lord had commanded: and aaron cast down hi rod befor pharaoh, and
befor hi servants, and it becam a serpent.

7:11 then pharaoh also call the wise men and the sorcerers: now the
magician of egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments.

7:12 for they cast down everi man hi rod, and they becam serpents:
but aaron' rod swallow up their rods.

7:13 and he harden pharaoh' heart, that he hearken not unto them;
a the lord had said.

7:14 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh' heart is hardened, he
refuseth to let the peopl go.

7:15 get thee unto pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the
water; and thou shalt stand by the river' brink against he come; and
th rod which wa turn to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

7:16 and thou shalt say unto him, the lord god of the hebrew hath
sent me unto thee, saying, let my peopl go, that they may serv me in
th wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 thu saith the lord, In thi thou shalt know that I am the lord:
behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
which are in the river, and they shall be turn to blood.

7:18 and the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
stink; and the egyptian shall loth to drink of the water of the
river.

7:19 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, take thi rod, and
stretch out thine hand upon the water of egypt, upon their streams,
upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pool of
water, that they may becom blood; and that there may be blood
throughout all the land of egypt, both in vessel of wood, and in
vessel of stone.

7:20 and mose and aaron did so, as the lord commanded; and he lifted
up the rod, and smote the water that were in the river, in the sight
of pharaoh, and in the sight of hi servants; and all the water that
wer in the river were turn to blood.

7:21 and the fish that wa in the river died; and the river stank, and
th egyptian could not drink of the water of the river; and there was
blood throughout all the land of egypt.

7:22 and the magician of egypt did so with their enchantments: and
pharaoh' heart wa hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the
lord had said.

7:23 and pharaoh turn and went into hi house, neither did he set
hi heart to thi also.

7:24 and all the egyptian dig round about the river for water to
drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

7:25 and seven day were fulfilled, after that the lord had smitten
th river.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, Go unto pharaoh, and say unto him,
thu saith the lord, let my peopl go, that they may serv me.

8:2 and if thou refus to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy
bord with frogs: 8:3 and the river shall bring forth frogs
abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy
bedchamber, and upon thi bed, and into the hous of thi servants, and
upon thi people, and into thine ovens, and into thi kneadingtroughs:
8:4 and the frog shall come up both on thee, and upon thi people, and
upon all thi servants.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch forth thine
hand with thi rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the
ponds, and caus frog to come up upon the land of egypt.

8:6 and aaron stretch out hi hand over the water of egypt; and the
frog came up, and cover the land of egypt.

8:7 and the magician did so with their enchantments, and brought up
frog upon the land of egypt.

8:8 then pharaoh call for mose and aaron, and said, intreat the
lord, that he may take away the frog from me, and from my people; and
i will let the peopl go, that they may do sacrific unto the lord.

8:9 and mose said unto pharaoh, glori over me: when shall I intreat
for thee, and for thi servants, and for thi people, to destroy the
frog from thee and thi houses, that they may remain in the river
only?  8:10 and he said, To morrow. and he said, Be it accord to
thi word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the lord
our god.

8:11 and the frog shall depart from thee, and from thi houses, and
from thi servants, and from thi people; they shall remain in the river
only.

8:12 and mose and aaron went out from pharaoh: and mose cri unto
th lord becaus of the frog which he had brought against pharaoh.

8:13 and the lord did accord to the word of moses; and the frogs
di out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 and they gather them togeth upon heaps: and the land stank.

8:15 but when pharaoh saw that there wa respite, he harden his
heart, and hearken not unto them; as the lord had said.

8:16 and the lord said unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch out thy
rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may becom lice
throughout all the land of egypt.

8:17 and they did so; for aaron stretch out hi hand with hi rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it becam lice in man, and in
beast; all the dust of the land becam lice throughout all the land of
egypt.

8:18 and the magician did so with their enchant to bring forth
lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 then the magician said unto pharaoh, thi is the finger of god:
and pharaoh' heart wa hardened, and he hearken not unto them; as
th lord had said.

8:20 and the lord said unto moses, rise up earli in the morning, and
stand befor pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto
him, thu saith the lord, let my peopl go, that they may serv me.

8:21 else, if thou wilt not let my peopl go, behold, I will send
swarm of fli upon thee, and upon thi servants, and upon thi people,
and into thi houses: and the hous of the egyptian shall be full of
swarm of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.

8:22 and I will sever in that day the land of goshen, in which my
peopl dwell, that no swarm of fli shall be there; to the end thou
mayest know that I am the lord in the midst of the earth.

8:23 and I will put a divis between my peopl and thi people: to
morrow shall thi sign be.

8:24 and the lord did so; and there came a grievou swarm of flies
into the hous of pharaoh, and into hi servants' houses, and into all
th land of egypt: the land wa corrupt by reason of the swarm of
flies.

8:25 and pharaoh call for mose and for aaron, and said, Go ye,
sacrific to your god in the land.

8:26 and mose said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
th abomin of the egyptian to the lord our god: lo, shall we
sacrific the abomin of the egyptian befor their eyes, and will
they not stone us?  8:27 We will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrific to the lord our god, as he shall command us.

8:28 and pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrific to the
lord your god in the wilderness; onli ye shall not go veri far away:
intreat for me.

8:29 and mose said, behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat
th lord that the swarm of fli may depart from pharaoh, from his
servants, and from hi people, to morrow: but let not pharaoh deal
deceit ani more in not let the peopl go to sacrific to the
lord.

8:30 and mose went out from pharaoh, and intreat the lord.

8:31 and the lord did accord to the word of moses; and he removed
th swarm of fli from pharaoh, from hi servants, and from his
people; there remain not one.

8:32 and pharaoh harden hi heart at thi time also, neither would
h let the peopl go.

9:1 then the lord said unto moses, Go in unto pharaoh, and tell him,
thu saith the lord god of the hebrews, let my peopl go, that they
may serv me.

9:2 for if thou refus to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3
behold, the hand of the lord is upon thi cattl which is in the field,
upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and
upon the sheep: there shall be a veri grievou murrain.

9:4 and the lord shall sever between the cattl of israel and the
cattl of egypt: and there shall noth die of all that is the
children' of israel.

9:5 and the lord appoint a set time, saying, To morrow the lord
shal do thi thing in the land.

9:6 and the lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattl of
egypt died: but of the cattl of the children of israel die not one.

9:7 and pharaoh sent, and, behold, there wa not one of the cattl of
th israelit dead. and the heart of pharaoh wa hardened, and he did
not let the peopl go.

9:8 and the lord said unto mose and unto aaron, take to you handfuls
of ash of the furnace, and let mose sprinkl it toward the heaven
in the sight of pharaoh.

9:9 and it shall becom small dust in all the land of egypt, and shall
b a boil break forth with blain upon man, and upon beast,
throughout all the land of egypt.

9:10 and they took ash of the furnace, and stood befor pharaoh; and
mos sprinkl it up toward heaven; and it becam a boil breaking
forth with blain upon man, and upon beast.

9:11 and the magician could not stand befor mose becaus of the
boils; for the boil wa upon the magicians, and upon all the
egyptians.

9:12 and the lord harden the heart of pharaoh, and he hearken not
unto them; as the lord had spoken unto moses.

9:13 and the lord said unto moses, rise up earli in the morning, and
stand befor pharaoh, and say unto him, thu saith the lord god of the
hebrews, let my peopl go, that they may serv me.

9:14 for I will at thi time send all my plagu upon thine heart, and
upon thi servants, and upon thi people; that thou mayest know that
ther is none like me in all the earth.

9:15 for now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy
peopl with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

9:16 and in veri deed for thi caus have I rais thee up, for to
shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declar throughout all
th earth.

9:17 As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt
not let them go?  9:18 behold, to morrow about thi time I will cause
it to rain a veri grievou hail, such as hath not been in egypt since
th foundat thereof even until now.

9:19 send therefor now, and gather thi cattle, and all that thou hast
in the field; for upon everi man and beast which shall be found in the
field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon
them, and they shall die.

9:20 He that fear the word of the lord among the servant of pharaoh
mad hi servant and hi cattl flee into the houses: 9:21 and he
that regard not the word of the lord left hi servant and his
cattl in the field.

9:22 and the lord said unto moses, stretch forth thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of egypt, upon man, and
upon beast, and upon everi herb of the field, throughout the land of
egypt.

9:23 and mose stretch forth hi rod toward heaven: and the lord
sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the
lord rain hail upon the land of egypt.

9:24 So there wa hail, and fire mingl with the hail, veri grievous,
such as there wa none like it in all the land of egypt sinc it
becam a nation.

9:25 and the hail smote throughout all the land of egypt all that was
in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote everi herb of the
field, and brake everi tree of the field.

9:26 onli in the land of goshen, where the children of israel were,
wa there no hail.

9:27 and pharaoh sent, and call for mose and aaron, and said unto
them, I have sin thi time: the lord is righteous, and I and my
peopl are wicked.

9:28 intreat the lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thund and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no
longer.

9:29 and mose said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, i
wil spread abroad my hand unto the lord; and the thunder shall
cease, neither shall there be ani more hail; that thou mayest know how
that the earth is the lord's.

9:30 but as for thee and thi servants, I know that ye will not yet
fear the lord god.

9:31 and the flax and the barley wa smitten: for the barley wa in
th ear, and the flax wa bolled.

9:32 but the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not
grown up.

9:33 and mose went out of the citi from pharaoh, and spread abroad
hi hand unto the lord: and the thunder and hail ceased, and the
rain wa not pour upon the earth.

9:34 and when pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
wer ceased, he sin yet more, and harden hi heart, he and his
servants.

9:35 and the heart of pharaoh wa hardened, neither would he let the
children of israel go; as the lord had spoken by moses.

10:1 and the lord said unto moses, Go in unto pharaoh: for I have
harden hi heart, and the heart of hi servants, that I might shew
thes my sign befor him: 10:2 and that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thi son, and of thi son' son, what thing I have wrought in egypt,
and my sign which I have done among them; that ye may know how that i
am the lord.

10:3 and mose and aaron came in unto pharaoh, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord god of the hebrews, how long wilt thou refus to humble
thyself befor me? let my peopl go, that they may serv me.

10:4 else, if thou refus to let my peopl go, behold, to morrow will
i bring the locust into thi coast: 10:5 and they shall cover the face
of the earth, that one cannot be abl to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residu of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you
from the hail, and shall eat everi tree which groweth for you out of
th field: 10:6 and they shall fill thi houses, and the hous of all
thi servants, and the hous of all the egyptians; which neither thy
fathers, nor thi fathers' father have seen, sinc the day that they
wer upon the earth unto thi day. and he turn himself, and went out
from pharaoh.

10:7 and pharaoh' servant said unto him, how long shall thi man be
a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serv the lord their
god: knowest thou not yet that egypt is destroyed?  10:8 and mose and
aaron were brought again unto pharaoh: and he said unto them, go,
serv the lord your god: but who are they that shall go?  10:9 and
mos said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flock and with our herd will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the lord.

10:10 and he said unto them, let the lord be so with you, as I will
let you go, and your littl ones: look to it; for evil is befor you.

10:11 not so: go now ye that are men, and serv the lord; for that ye
did desire. and they were driven out from pharaoh' presence.

10:12 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the
land of egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of
egypt, and eat everi herb of the land, even all that the hail hath
left.

10:13 and mose stretch forth hi rod over the land of egypt, and
th lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that
night; and when it wa morning, the east wind brought the locusts.

10:14 and the locust went up over all the land of egypt, and rest in
al the coast of egypt: veri grievou were they; befor them there
wer no such locust as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 for they cover the face of the whole earth, so that the land
wa darkened; and they did eat everi herb of the land, and all the
fruit of the tree which the hail had left: and there remain not any
green thing in the trees, or in the herb of the field, through all
th land of egypt.

10:16 then pharaoh call for mose and aaron in haste; and he said, i
hav sin against the lord your god, and against you.

10:17 now therefor forgive, I pray thee, my sin onli thi once, and
intreat the lord your god, that he may take away from me thi death
only.

10:18 and he went out from pharaoh, and intreat the lord.

10:19 and the lord turn a mighti strong west wind, which took away
th locusts, and cast them into the red sea; there remain not one
locust in all the coast of egypt.

10:20 but the lord harden pharaoh' heart, so that he would not let
th children of israel go.

10:21 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be dark over the land of egypt, even
dark which may be felt.

10:22 and mose stretch forth hi hand toward heaven; and there was
a thick dark in all the land of egypt three days: 10:23 they saw
not one another, neither rose ani from hi place for three days: but
al the children of israel had light in their dwellings.

10:24 and pharaoh call unto moses, and said, Go ye, serv the lord;
onli let your flock and your herd be stayed: let your littl ones
also go with you.

10:25 and mose said, thou must give us also sacrific and burnt
offerings, that we may sacrific unto the lord our god.

10:26 our cattl also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be
left behind; for thereof must we take to serv the lord our god; and
w know not with what we must serv the lord, until we come thither.

10:27 but the lord harden pharaoh' heart, and he would not let them
go.

10:28 and pharaoh said unto him, get thee from me, take heed to
thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou
shalt die.

10:29 and mose said, thou hast spoken well, I will see thi face again
no more.

11:1 and the lord said unto moses, yet will I bring one plagu more
upon pharaoh, and upon egypt; afterward he will let you go hence:
when he shall let you go, he shall sure thrust you out hence
altogether.

11:2 speak now in the ear of the people, and let everi man borrow of
hi neighbour, and everi woman of her neighbour, jewel of silver and
jewel of gold.

11:3 and the lord gave the peopl favour in the sight of the
egyptians.

moreov the man mose wa veri great in the land of egypt, in the
sight of pharaoh' servants, and in the sight of the people.

11:4 and mose said, thu saith the lord, about midnight will I go out
into the midst of egypt: 11:5 and all the firstborn in the land of
egypt shall die, from the first born of pharaoh that sitteth upon his
throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidserv that is behind the
mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.

11:6 and there shall be a great cri throughout all the land of egypt,
such as there wa none like it, nor shall be like it ani more.

11:7 but against ani of the children of israel shall not a dog move
hi tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the lord
doth put a differ between the egyptian and israel.

11:8 and all these thi servant shall come down unto me, and bow down
themselv unto me, saying, get thee out, and all the peopl that
follow thee: and after that I will go out. and he went out from
pharaoh in a great anger.

11:9 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
that my wonder may be multipli in the land of egypt.

11:10 and mose and aaron did all these wonder befor pharaoh: and
th lord harden pharaoh' heart, so that he would not let the
children of israel go out of hi land.

12:1 and the lord spake unto mose and aaron in the land of egypt
saying, 12:2 thi month shall be unto you the begin of months: it
shal be the first month of the year to you.

12:3 speak ye unto all the congreg of israel, saying, In the
tenth day of thi month they shall take to them everi man a lamb,
accord to the hous of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 12:4 and
if the household be too littl for the lamb, let him and hi neighbour
next unto hi hous take it accord to the number of the souls;
everi man accord to hi eat shall make your count for the lamb.

12:5 your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye
shal take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: 12:6 and ye shall
keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole
assembl of the congreg of israel shall kill it in the evening.

12:7 and they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side
post and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat
it.

12:8 and they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and
unleaven bread; and with bitter herb they shall eat it.

12:9 eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with
fire; hi head with hi legs, and with the purten thereof.

12:10 and ye shall let noth of it remain until the morning; and
that which remaineth of it until the morn ye shall burn with fire.

12:11 and thu shall ye eat it; with your loin girded, your shoe on
your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste:
it is the lord' passover.

12:12 for I will pass through the land of egypt thi night, and will
smit all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both man and beast; and
against all the god of egypt I will execut judgment: I am the lord.

12:13 and the blood shall be to you for a token upon the hous where
y are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague
shal not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of egypt.

12:14 and thi day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep
it a feast to the lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a
feast by an ordin for ever.

12:15 seven day shall ye eat unleaven bread; even the first day ye
shal put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoev eateth
leaven bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul
shal be cut off from israel.

12:16 and in the first day there shall be an holi convocation, and in
th seventh day there shall be an holi convoc to you; no manner
of work shall be done in them, save that which everi man must eat,
that onli may be done of you.

12:17 and ye shall observ the feast of unleaven bread; for in this
selfsam day have I brought your armi out of the land of egypt:
therefor shall ye observ thi day in your gener by an
ordin for ever.

12:18 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even,
y shall eat unleaven bread, until the one and twentieth day of the
month at even.

12:19 seven day shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for
whosoev eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut
off from the congreg of israel, whether he be a stranger, or born
in the land.

12:20 Ye shall eat noth leavened; in all your habit shall ye
eat unleaven bread.

12:21 then mose call for all the elder of israel, and said unto
them, draw out and take you a lamb accord to your families, and
kil the passover.

12:22 and ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood
that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts
with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at
th door of hi hous until the morning.

12:23 for the lord will pass through to smite the egyptians; and when
h seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the
lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroy to
com in unto your hous to smite you.

12:24 and ye shall observ thi thing for an ordin to thee and to
thi son for ever.

12:25 and it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the
lord will give you, accord as he hath promised, that ye shall keep
thi service.

12:26 and it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto
you, what mean ye by thi service?  12:27 that ye shall say, It is the
sacrific of the lord' passover, who pass over the hous of the
children of israel in egypt, when he smote the egyptians, and
deliv our houses. and the peopl bow the head and worshipped.

12:28 and the children of israel went away, and did as the lord had
command mose and aaron, so did they.

12:29 and it came to pass, that at midnight the lord smote all the
firstborn in the land of egypt, from the firstborn of pharaoh that sat
on hi throne unto the firstborn of the captiv that wa in the
dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

12:30 and pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all hi servants, and
al the egyptians; and there wa a great cri in egypt; for there was
not a hous where there wa not one dead.

12:31 and he call for mose and aaron by night, and said, rise up,
and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of
israel; and go, serv the lord, as ye have said.

12:32 also take your flock and your herds, as ye have said, and be
gone; and bless me also.

12:33 and the egyptian were urgent upon the people, that they might
send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.

12:34 and the peopl took their dough befor it wa leavened, their
kneadingtrough be bound up in their cloth upon their shoulders.

12:35 and the children of israel did accord to the word of moses;
and they borrow of the egyptian jewel of silver, and jewel of
gold, and raiment: 12:36 and the lord gave the peopl favour in the
sight of the egyptians, so that they lent unto them such thing as
they required. and they spoil the egyptians.

12:37 and the children of israel journey from rames to succoth,
about six hundr thousand on foot that were men, besid children.

12:38 and a mix multitud went up also with them; and flocks, and
herds, even veri much cattle.

12:39 and they bake unleaven cake of the dough which they brought
forth out of egypt, for it wa not leavened; becaus they were thrust
out of egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepar for
themselv ani victual.

12:40 now the sojourn of the children of israel, who dwelt in
egypt, wa four hundr and thirti years.

12:41 and it came to pass at the end of the four hundr and thirty
years, even the selfsam day it came to pass, that all the host of
th lord went out from the land of egypt.

12:42 It is a night to be much observ unto the lord for bringing
them out from the land of egypt: thi is that night of the lord to be
observ of all the children of israel in their generations.

12:43 and the lord said unto mose and aaron, thi is the ordin of
th passover: there shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 but every
man' servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised
him, then shall he eat thereof.

12:45 A foreign and an hire servant shall not eat thereof.

12:46 In one hous shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carri forth ought
of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.

12:47 all the congreg of israel shall keep it.

12:48 and when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
passov to the lord, let all hi male be circumcised, and then let
him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the
land: for no uncircumcis person shall eat thereof.

12:49 one law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger
that sojourneth among you.

12:50 thu did all the children of israel; as the lord command moses
and aaron, so did they.

12:51 and it came to pass the selfsam day, that the lord did bring
th children of israel out of the land of egypt by their armies.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 sanctifi unto me all
th firstborn, whatsoev openeth the womb among the children of
israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

13:3 and mose said unto the people, rememb thi day, in which ye
cam out from egypt, out of the hous of bondage; for by strength of
hand the lord brought you out from thi place: there shall no leavened
bread be eaten.

13:4 thi day came ye out in the month abib.

13:5 and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land of
th canaanites, and the hittites, and the amorites, and the hivites,
and the jebusites, which he sware unto thi father to give thee, a
land flow with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep thi servic in
thi month.

13:6 seven day thou shalt eat unleaven bread, and in the seventh
day shall be a feast to the lord.

13:7 unleaven bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no
leaven bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen
with thee in all thi quarters.

13:8 and thou shalt shew thi son in that day, saying, thi is done
becaus of that which the lord did unto me when I came forth out of
egypt.

13:9 and it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a
memori between thine eyes, that the lord' law may be in thi mouth:
for with a strong hand hath the lord brought thee out of egypt.

13:10 thou shalt therefor keep thi ordin in hi season from year
to year.

13:11 and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land of
th canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thi fathers, and shall
giv it thee, 13:12 that thou shalt set apart unto the lord all that
openeth the matrix, and everi firstl that cometh of a beast which
thou hast; the male shall be the lord's.

13:13 and everi firstl of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and
if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break hi neck: and all
th firstborn of man among thi children shalt thou redeem.

13:14 and it shall be when thi son asketh thee in time to come,
saying, what is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of
hand the lord brought us out from egypt, from the hous of bondage:
13:15 and it came to pass, when pharaoh would hardli let us go, that
th lord slew all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both the
firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefor I sacrific to
th lord all that openeth the matrix, be males; but all the
firstborn of my children I redeem.

13:16 and it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets
between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the lord brought us forth
out of egypt.

13:17 and it came to pass, when pharaoh had let the peopl go, that
god led them not through the way of the land of the philistines,
although that wa near; for god said, lest peradventur the people
rep when they see war, and they return to egypt: 13:18 but god led
th peopl about, through the way of the wilder of the red sea:
and the children of israel went up har out of the land of egypt.

13:19 and mose took the bone of joseph with him: for he had straitly
sworn the children of israel, saying, god will sure visit you; and
y shall carri up my bone away henc with you.

13:20 and they took their journey from succoth, and encamp in etham,
in the edg of the wilderness.

13:21 and the lord went befor them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to
lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them
light; to go by day and night: 13:22 He took not away the pillar of
th cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from befor the
people.

14:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 14:2 speak unto the
children of israel, that they turn and encamp befor pihahiroth,
between migdol and the sea, over against baalzephon: befor it shall
y encamp by the sea.

14:3 for pharaoh will say of the children of israel, they are
entangl in the land, the wilder hath shut them in.

14:4 and I will harden pharaoh' heart, that he shall follow after
them; and I will be honour upon pharaoh, and upon all hi host; that
th egyptian may know that I am the lord. and they did so.

14:5 and it wa told the king of egypt that the peopl fled: and the
heart of pharaoh and of hi servant wa turn against the people,
and they said, whi have we done this, that we have let israel go from
serv us?  14:6 and he made readi hi chariot, and took hi people
with him: 14:7 and he took six hundr chosen chariots, and all the
chariot of egypt, and captain over everi one of them.

14:8 and the lord harden the heart of pharaoh king of egypt, and he
pursu after the children of israel: and the children of israel went
out with an high hand.

14:9 but the egyptian pursu after them, all the hors and chariots
of pharaoh, and hi horsemen, and hi army, and overtook them
encamp by the sea, besid pihahiroth, befor baalzephon.

14:10 and when pharaoh drew nigh, the children of israel lift up
their eyes, and, behold, the egyptian march after them; and they
wer sore afraid: and the children of israel cri out unto the lord.

14:11 and they said unto moses, becaus there were no grave in egypt,
hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefor hast thou
dealt thu with us, to carri us forth out of egypt?  14:12 Is not this
th word that we did tell thee in egypt, saying, let us alone, that we
may serv the egyptians? for it had been better for us to serv the
egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.

14:13 and mose said unto the people, fear ye not, stand still, and
se the salvat of the lord, which he will shew to you to day: for
th egyptian whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
mor for ever.

14:14 the lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

14:15 and the lord said unto moses, wherefor criest thou unto me?
speak unto the children of israel, that they go forward: 14:16 but
lift thou up thi rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and
divid it: and the children of israel shall go on dri ground through
th midst of the sea.

14:17 and I, behold, I will harden the heart of the egyptians, and
they shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon pharaoh, and
upon all hi host, upon hi chariots, and upon hi horsemen.

14:18 and the egyptian shall know that I am the lord, when I have
gotten me honour upon pharaoh, upon hi chariots, and upon his
horsemen.

14:19 and the angel of god, which went befor the camp of israel,
remov and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from
befor their face, and stood behind them: 14:20 and it came between
th camp of the egyptian and the camp of israel; and it wa a cloud
and dark to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the
on came not near the other all the night.

14:21 and mose stretch out hi hand over the sea; and the lord
caus the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and
mad the sea dri land, and the water were divided.

14:22 and the children of israel went into the midst of the sea upon
th dri ground: and the water were a wall unto them on their right
hand, and on their left.

14:23 and the egyptian pursued, and went in after them to the midst
of the sea, even all pharaoh' horses, hi chariots, and hi horsemen.

14:24 and it came to pass, that in the morn watch the lord looked
unto the host of the egyptian through the pillar of fire and of the
cloud, and troubl the host of the egyptians, 14:25 and took off
their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the
egyptian said, let us flee from the face of israel; for the lord
fighteth for them against the egyptians.

14:26 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the
sea, that the water may come again upon the egyptians, upon their
chariots, and upon their horsemen.

14:27 and mose stretch forth hi hand over the sea, and the sea
return to hi strength when the morn appeared; and the egyptians
fl against it; and the lord overthrew the egyptian in the midst of
th sea.

14:28 and the water returned, and cover the chariots, and the
horsemen, and all the host of pharaoh that came into the sea after
them; there remain not so much as one of them.

14:29 but the children of israel walk upon dri land in the midst of
th sea; and the water were a wall unto them on their right hand, and
on their left.

14:30 thu the lord save israel that day out of the hand of the
egyptians; and israel saw the egyptian dead upon the sea shore.

14:31 and israel saw that great work which the lord did upon the
egyptians: and the peopl fear the lord, and believ the lord, and
hi servant moses.

15:1 then sang mose and the children of israel thi song unto the
lord, and spake, saying, I will sing unto the lord, for he hath
triumph gloriously: the hors and hi rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:2 the lord is my strength and song, and he is becom my salvation:
h is my god, and I will prepar him an habitation; my father' god,
and I will exalt him.

15:3 the lord is a man of war: the lord is hi name.

15:4 pharaoh' chariot and hi host hath he cast into the sea: his
chosen captain also are drown in the red sea.

15:5 the depth have cover them: they sank into the bottom as a
stone.

15:6 thi right hand, O lord, is becom gloriou in power: thi right
hand, O lord, hath dash in piec the enemy.

15:7 and in the great of thine excel thou hast overthrown
them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thi wrath, which
consum them as stubble.

15:8 and with the blast of thi nostril the water were gathered
together, the flood stood upright as an heap, and the depth were
cong in the heart of the sea.

15:9 the enemi said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divid the
spoil; my lust shall be satisfi upon them; I will draw my sword, my
hand shall destroy them.

15:10 thou didst blow with thi wind, the sea cover them: they sank
a lead in the mighti waters.

15:11 who is like unto thee, O lord, among the gods? who is like thee,
glori in holiness, fear in praises, do wonders?  15:12 thou
stretchedst out thi right hand, the earth swallow them.

15:13 thou in thi merci hast led forth the peopl which thou hast
redeemed: thou hast guid them in thi strength unto thi holy
habitation.

15:14 the peopl shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on
th inhabit of palestina.

15:15 then the duke of edom shall be amazed; the mighti men of moab,
trembl shall take hold upon them; all the inhabit of canaan
shal melt away.

15:16 fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the great of thine
arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thi peopl pass over, o
lord, till the peopl pass over, which thou hast purchased.

15:17 thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of
thin inheritance, in the place, O lord, which thou hast made for thee
to dwell in, in the sanctuary, O lord, which thi hand have
established.

15:18 the lord shall reign for ever and ever.

15:19 for the hors of pharaoh went in with hi chariot and with his
horsemen into the sea, and the lord brought again the water of the
sea upon them; but the children of israel went on dri land in the
midst of the sea.

15:20 and miriam the prophetess, the sister of aaron, took a timbrel
in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrel and
with dances.

15:21 and miriam answer them, sing ye to the lord, for he hath
triumph gloriously; the hors and hi rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:22 So mose brought israel from the red sea, and they went out into
th wilder of shur; and they went three day in the wilderness,
and found no water.

15:23 and when they came to marah, they could not drink of the waters
of marah, for they were bitter: therefor the name of it wa called
marah.

15:24 and the peopl murmur against moses, saying, what shall we
drink?  15:25 and he cri unto the lord; and the lord shew him a
tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the water were made
sweet: there he made for them a statut and an ordinance, and there he
prov them, 15:26 and said, If thou wilt dilig hearken to the
voic of the lord thi god, and wilt do that which is right in his
sight, and wilt give ear to hi commandments, and keep all his
statutes, I will put none of these diseas upon thee, which I have
brought upon the egyptians: for I am the lord that healeth thee.

15:27 and they came to elim, where were twelv well of water, and
threescor and ten palm trees: and they encamp there by the waters.

16:1 and they took their journey from elim, and all the congregation
of the children of israel came unto the wilder of sin, which is
between elim and sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after
their depart out of the land of egypt.

16:2 and the whole congreg of the children of israel murmured
against mose and aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 and the children of
israel said unto them, would to god we had die by the hand of the
lord in the land of egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we
did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this
wilderness, to kill thi whole assembl with hunger.

16:4 then said the lord unto moses, behold, I will rain bread from
heaven for you; and the peopl shall go out and gather a certain rate
everi day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or
no.

16:5 and it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall
prepar that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as
they gather daily.

16:6 and mose and aaron said unto all the children of israel, at
even, then ye shall know that the lord hath brought you out from the
land of egypt: 16:7 and in the morning, then ye shall see the glori of
th lord; for that he heareth your murmur against the lord: and
what are we, that ye murmur against us?  16:8 and mose said, this
shal be, when the lord shall give you in the even flesh to eat,
and in the morn bread to the full; for that the lord heareth your
murmur which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your
murmur are not against us, but against the lord.

16:9 and mose spake unto aaron, say unto all the congreg of the
children of israel, come near befor the lord: for he hath heard your
murmurings.

16:10 and it came to pass, as aaron spake unto the whole congregation
of the children of israel, that they look toward the wilderness,
and, behold, the glori of the lord appear in the cloud.

16:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:12 I have heard the
murmur of the children of israel: speak unto them, saying, At even
y shall eat flesh, and in the morn ye shall be fill with bread;
and ye shall know that I am the lord your god.

16:13 and it came to pass, that at even the quail came up, and
cov the camp: and in the morn the dew lay round about the host.

16:14 and when the dew that lay wa gone up, behold, upon the face of
th wilder there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar
frost on the ground.

16:15 and when the children of israel saw it, they said one to
another, It is manna: for they wist not what it was. and mose said
unto them, thi is the bread which the lord hath given you to eat.

16:16 thi is the thing which the lord hath commanded, gather of it
everi man accord to hi eating, an omer for everi man, accord to
th number of your persons; take ye everi man for them which are in
hi tents.

16:17 and the children of israel did so, and gathered, some more, some
less.

16:18 and when they did mete it with an omer, he that gather much
had noth over, and he that gather littl had no lack; they
gath everi man accord to hi eating.

16:19 and mose said, let no man leav of it till the morning.

16:20 notwithstand they hearken not unto moses; but some of them
left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and moses
wa wroth with them.

16:21 and they gather it everi morning, everi man accord to his
eating: and when the sun wax hot, it melted.

16:22 and it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gather twice
a much bread, two omer for one man: and all the ruler of the
congreg came and told moses.

16:23 and he said unto them, thi is that which the lord hath said, to
morrow is the rest of the holi sabbath unto the lord: bake that which
y will bake to day, and seeth that ye will seethe; and that which
remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.

16:24 and they laid it up till the morning, as mose bade: and it did
not stink, neither wa there ani worm therein.

16:25 and mose said, eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto
th lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field.

16:26 six day ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is
th sabbath, in it there shall be none.

16:27 and it came to pass, that there went out some of the peopl on
th seventh day for to gather, and they found none.

16:28 and the lord said unto moses, how long refus ye to keep my
command and my laws?  16:29 see, for that the lord hath given you
th sabbath, therefor he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two
days; abid ye everi man in hi place, let no man go out of hi place
on the seventh day.

16:30 So the peopl rest on the seventh day.

16:31 and the hous of israel call the name thereof manna: and it
wa like coriand seed, white; and the tast of it wa like wafers
mad with honey.

16:32 and mose said, thi is the thing which the lord commandeth,
fil an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see
th bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness, when I brought
you forth from the land of egypt.

16:33 and mose said unto aaron, take a pot, and put an omer full of
manna therein, and lay it up befor the lord, to be kept for your
generations.

16:34 As the lord command moses, so aaron laid it up befor the
testimony, to be kept.

16:35 and the children of israel did eat manna forti years, until they
cam to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the
bord of the land of canaan.

16:36 now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

17:1 and all the congreg of the children of israel journey from
th wilder of sin, after their journeys, accord to the
command of the lord, and pitch in rephidim: and there wa no
wat for the peopl to drink.

17:2 wherefor the peopl did chide with moses, and said, give us
wat that we may drink. and mose said unto them, whi chide ye with
me? wherefor do ye tempt the lord?  17:3 and the peopl thirsted
ther for water; and the peopl murmur against moses, and said,
wherefor is thi that thou hast brought us up out of egypt, to kill
u and our children and our cattl with thirst?  17:4 and mose cried
unto the lord, saying, what shall I do unto thi people? they be
almost readi to stone me.

17:5 and the lord said unto moses, Go on befor the people, and take
with thee of the elder of israel; and thi rod, wherewith thou smotest
th river, take in thine hand, and go.

17:6 behold, I will stand befor thee there upon the rock in horeb;
and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it,
that the peopl may drink. and mose did so in the sight of the elders
of israel.

17:7 and he call the name of the place massah, and meribah, because
of the chide of the children of israel, and becaus they tempt the
lord, saying, Is the lord among us, or not?  17:8 then came amalek,
and fought with israel in rephidim.

17:9 and mose said unto joshua, choos us out men, and go out, fight
with amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the
rod of god in mine hand.

17:10 So joshua did as mose had said to him, and fought with amalek:
and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 and it came to pass, when mose held up hi hand, that israel
prevailed: and when he let down hi hand, amalek prevailed.

17:12 but mose hand were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it
und him, and he sat thereon; and aaron and hur stay up hi hands,
th one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his
hand were steadi until the go down of the sun.

17:13 and joshua discomfit amalek and hi peopl with the edg of
th sword.

17:14 and the lord said unto moses, write thi for a memori in a
book, and rehears it in the ear of joshua: for I will utterli put
out the remembr of amalek from under heaven.

17:15 and mose built an altar, and call the name of it
jehovahnissi: 17:16 for he said, becaus the lord hath sworn that the
lord will have war with amalek from gener to generation.

18:1 when jethro, the priest of midian, moses' father in law, heard of
al that god had done for moses, and for israel hi people, and that
th lord had brought israel out of egypt; 18:2 then jethro, moses'
fath in law, took zipporah, moses' wife, after he had sent her back,
18:3 and her two sons; of which the name of the one wa gershom; for
h said, I have been an alien in a strang land: 18:4 and the name of
th other wa eliezer; for the god of my father, said he, wa mine
help, and deliv me from the sword of pharaoh: 18:5 and jethro,
moses' father in law, came with hi son and hi wife unto mose into
th wilderness, where he encamp at the mount of god: 18:6 and he
said unto moses, I thi father in law jethro am come unto thee, and thy
wife, and her two son with her.

18:7 and mose went out to meet hi father in law, and did obeisance,
and kiss him; and they ask each other of their welfare; and they
cam into the tent.

18:8 and mose told hi father in law all that the lord had done unto
pharaoh and to the egyptian for israel' sake, and all the travail
that had come upon them by the way, and how the lord deliv them.

18:9 and jethro rejoic for all the good which the lord had done
to israel, whom he had deliv out of the hand of the egyptians.

18:10 and jethro said, bless be the lord, who hath deliv you out
of the hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of pharaoh, who hath
deliv the peopl from under the hand of the egyptians.

18:11 now I know that the lord is greater than all gods: for in the
th wherein they dealt proudli he wa abov them.

18:12 and jethro, moses' father in law, took a burnt offer and
sacrific for god: and aaron came, and all the elder of israel, to
eat bread with moses' father in law befor god.

18:13 and it came to pass on the morrow, that mose sat to judg the
people: and the peopl stood by mose from the morn unto the
evening.

18:14 and when moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people,
h said, what is thi thing that thou doest to the people? whi sittest
th thyself alone, and all the peopl stand by thee from morn unto
even?  18:15 and mose said unto hi father in law, becaus the people
com unto me to enquir of god: 18:16 when they have a matter, they
com unto me; and I judg between one and another, and I do make them
know the statut of god, and hi laws.

18:17 and moses' father in law said unto him, the thing that thou
doest is not good.

18:18 thou wilt sure wear away, both thou, and thi peopl that is
with thee: for thi thing is too heavi for thee; thou art not abl to
perform it thyself alone.

18:19 hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and god
shal be with thee: Be thou for the peopl to god-ward, that thou
mayest bring the caus unto god: 18:20 and thou shalt teach them
ordin and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must
walk, and the work that they must do.

18:21 moreov thou shalt provid out of all the peopl abl men, such
a fear god, men of truth, hate covetousness; and place such over
them, to be ruler of thousands, and ruler of hundreds, ruler of
fifties, and ruler of tens: 18:22 and let them judg the peopl at
al seasons: and it shall be, that everi great matter they shall bring
unto thee, but everi small matter they shall judge: so shall it be
easi for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

18:23 If thou shalt do thi thing, and god command thee so, then thou
shalt be abl to endure, and all thi peopl shall also go to their
plac in peace.

18:24 So mose hearken to the voic of hi father in law, and did
al that he had said.

18:25 and mose chose abl men out of all israel, and made them heads
ov the people, ruler of thousands, ruler of hundreds, ruler of
fifties, and ruler of tens.

18:26 and they judg the peopl at all seasons: the hard caus they
brought unto moses, but everi small matter they judg themselves.

18:27 and mose let hi father in law depart; and he went hi way into
hi own land.

19:1 In the third month, when the children of israel were gone forth
out of the land of egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of sinai.

19:2 for they were depart from rephidim, and were come to the desert
of sinai, and had pitch in the wilderness; and there israel camped
befor the mount.

19:3 and mose went up unto god, and the lord call unto him out of
th mountain, saying, thu shalt thou say to the hous of jacob, and
tel the children of israel; 19:4 Ye have seen what I did unto the
egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
myself.

19:5 now therefore, if ye will obey my voic indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasur unto me abov all
people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 and ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests, and an holi nation.

thes are the word which thou shalt speak unto the children of
israel.

19:7 and mose came and call for the elder of the people, and laid
befor their face all these word which the lord command him.

19:8 and all the peopl answer together, and said, all that the lord
hath spoken we will do. and mose return the word of the people
unto the lord.

19:9 and the lord said unto moses, lo, I come unto thee in a thick
cloud, that the peopl may hear when I speak with thee, and believe
the for ever.

and mose told the word of the peopl unto the lord.

19:10 and the lord said unto moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify
them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, 19:11 and
b readi against the third day: for the third day the lord will come
down in the sight of all the peopl upon mount sinai.

19:12 and thou shalt set bound unto the peopl round about, saying,
tak heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch
th border of it: whosoev toucheth the mount shall be sure put to
death: 19:13 there shall not an hand touch it, but he shall sure be
stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not
live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.

19:14 and mose went down from the mount unto the people, and
sanctifi the people; and they wash their clothes.

19:15 and he said unto the people, Be readi against the third day:
com not at your wives.

19:16 and it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
wer thunder and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and
th voic of the trumpet exceed loud; so that all the peopl that
wa in the camp trembled.

19:17 and mose brought forth the peopl out of the camp to meet with
god; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

19:18 and mount sinai wa altogeth on a smoke, becaus the lord
descend upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascend as the smoke
of a furnace, and the whole mount quak greatly.

19:19 and when the voic of the trumpet sound long, and wax louder
and louder, mose spake, and god answer him by a voice.

19:20 and the lord came down upon mount sinai, on the top of the
mount: and the lord call mose up to the top of the mount; and moses
w up.

19:21 and the lord said unto moses, Go down, charg the people, lest
they break through unto the lord to gaze, and mani of them perish.

19:22 and let the priest also, which come near to the lord, sanctify
themselves, lest the lord break forth upon them.

19:23 and mose said unto the lord, the peopl cannot come up to mount
sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, set bound about the mount, and
sanctifi it.

19:24 and the lord said unto him, away, get thee down, and thou shalt
com up, thou, and aaron with thee: but let not the priest and the
peopl break through to come up unto the lord, lest he break forth
upon them.

19:25 So mose went down unto the people, and spake unto them.

20:1 and god spake all these words, saying, 20:2 I am the lord thy
god, which have brought thee out of the land of egypt, out of the
hous of bondage.

20:3 thou shalt have no other god befor me.

20:4 thou shalt not make unto thee ani graven image, or ani likeness
of ani thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath,
or that is in the water under the earth.

20:5 thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serv them: for i
th lord thi god am a jealou god, visit the iniqu of the
fath upon the children unto the third and fourth gener of them
that hate me; 20:6 and shew merci unto thousand of them that love
me, and keep my commandments.

20:7 thou shalt not take the name of the lord thi god in vain; for the
lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh hi name in vain.

20:8 rememb the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

20:9 six day shalt thou labour, and do all thi work: 20:10 but the
seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thi god: in it thou shalt not
do ani work, thou, nor thi son, nor thi daughter, thi manservant, nor
thi maidservant, nor thi cattle, nor thi stranger that is within thy
gates: 20:11 for in six day the lord made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rest the seventh day: wherefor the
lord bless the sabbath day, and hallow it.

20:12 honour thi father and thi mother: that thi day may be long upon
th land which the lord thi god giveth thee.

20:13 thou shalt not kill.

20:14 thou shalt not commit adultery.

20:15 thou shalt not steal.

20:16 thou shalt not bear fals wit against thi neighbour.

20:17 thou shalt not covet thi neighbour' house, thou shalt not covet
thi neighbour' wife, nor hi manservant, nor hi maidservant, nor his
ox, nor hi ass, nor ani thing that is thi neighbour's.

20:18 and all the peopl saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and
th nois of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the
peopl saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

20:19 and they said unto moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear:
but let not god speak with us, lest we die.

20:20 and mose said unto the people, fear not: for god is come to
prov you, and that hi fear may be befor your faces, that ye sin
not.

20:21 and the peopl stood afar off, and mose drew near unto the
thick dark where god was.

20:22 and the lord said unto moses, thu thou shalt say unto the
children of israel, Ye have seen that I have talk with you from
heaven.

20:23 Ye shall not make with me god of silver, neither shall ye make
unto you god of gold.

20:24 An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice
thereon thi burnt offerings, and thi peac offerings, thi sheep, and
thin oxen: in all place where I record my name I will come unto
thee, and I will bless thee.

20:25 and if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build
it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thi tool upon it, thou hast
pollut it.

20:26 neither shalt thou go up by step unto mine altar, that thy
naked be not discov thereon.

21:1 now these are the judgment which thou shalt set befor them.

21:2 If thou buy an hebrew servant, six year he shall serve: and in
th seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

21:3 If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were
married, then hi wife shall go out with him.

21:4 If hi master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons
or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he
shal go out by himself.

21:5 and if the servant shall plainli say, I love my master, my wife,
and my children; I will not go out free: 21:6 then hi master shall
br him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or
unto the door post; and hi master shall bore hi ear through with an
aul; and he shall serv him for ever.

21:7 and if a man sell hi daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not
go out as the menserv do.

21:8 If she pleas not her master, who hath betroth her to himself,
then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strang nation
h shall have no power, see he hath dealt deceit with her.

21:9 and if he have betroth her unto hi son, he shall deal with her
aft the manner of daughters.

21:10 If he take him anoth wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty
of marriage, shall he not diminish.

21:11 and if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out
fre without money.

21:12 He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be sure put to
death.

21:13 and if a man lie not in wait, but god deliv him into hi hand;
then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.

21:14 but if a man come presumptu upon hi neighbour, to slay him
with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.

21:15 and he that smiteth hi father, or hi mother, shall be surely
put to death.

21:16 and he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found
in hi hand, he shall sure be put to death.

21:17 and he that curseth hi father, or hi mother, shall sure be
put to death.

21:18 and if men strive together, and one smite anoth with a stone,
or with hi fist, and he die not, but keepeth hi bed: 21:19 If he
ris again, and walk abroad upon hi staff, then shall he that smote
him be quit: onli he shall pay for the loss of hi time, and shall
caus him to be thoroughli healed.

21:20 and if a man smite hi servant, or hi maid, with a rod, and he
di under hi hand; he shall be sure punished.

21:21 notwithstanding, if he continu a day or two, he shall not be
punished: for he is hi money.

21:22 If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit
depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely
punished, accord as the woman' husband will lay upon him; and he
shal pay as the judg determine.

21:23 and if ani mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,
21:24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
21:25 burn for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.

21:26 and if a man smite the eye of hi servant, or the eye of his
maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for hi eye' sake.

21:27 and if he smite out hi manservant' tooth, or hi maidservant's
tooth; he shall let him go free for hi tooth' sake.

21:28 If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall
b sure stoned, and hi flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of
th ox shall be quit.

21:29 but if the ox were wont to push with hi horn in time past, and
it hath been testifi to hi owner, and he hath not kept him in, but
that he hath kill a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his
own also shall be put to death.

21:30 If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for
th ransom of hi life whatsoev is laid upon him.

21:31 whether he have gore a son, or have gore a daughter, according
to thi judgment shall it be done unto him.

21:32 If the ox shall push a manserv or a maidservant; he shall
giv unto their master thirti shekel of silver, and the ox shall be
stoned.

21:33 and if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and
not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein; 21:34 the owner of the
pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them; and the
dead beast shall be his.

21:35 and if one man' ox hurt another's, that he die; then they shall
sel the live ox, and divid the money of it; and the dead ox also
they shall divide.

21:36 Or if it be known that the ox hath use to push in time past,
and hi owner hath not kept him in; he shall sure pay ox for ox; and
th dead shall be hi own.

22:1 If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it;
h shall restor five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.

22:2 If a thief be found break up, and be smitten that he die,
ther shall no blood be shed for him.

22:3 If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him;
for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall
b sold for hi theft.

22:4 If the theft be certainli found in hi hand alive, whether it be
ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restor double.

22:5 If a man shall caus a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall
put in hi beast, and shall feed in anoth man' field; of the best
of hi own field, and of the best of hi own vineyard, shall he make
restitution.

22:6 If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stack of
corn, or the stand corn, or the field, be consum therewith; he
that kindl the fire shall sure make restitution.

22:7 If a man shall deliv unto hi neighbour money or stuff to keep,
and it be stolen out of the man' house; if the thief be found, let
him pay double.

22:8 If the thief be not found, then the master of the hous shall be
brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put hi hand unto his
neighbour' goods.

22:9 for all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for
sheep, for raiment, or for ani manner of lost thing which another
challengeth to be his, the caus of both parti shall come befor the
judges; and whom the judg shall condemn, he shall pay doubl unto
hi neighbour.

22:10 If a man deliv unto hi neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a
sheep, or ani beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away,
no man see it: 22:11 then shall an oath of the lord be between them
both, that he hath not put hi hand unto hi neighbour' goods; and
th owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.

22:12 and if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitut unto the
own thereof.

22:13 If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and
h shall not make good that which wa torn.

22:14 and if a man borrow ought of hi neighbour, and it be hurt, or
die, the owner thereof be not with it, he shall sure make it
good.

22:15 but if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good:
if it be an hire thing, it came for hi hire.

22:16 and if a man entic a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with
her, he shall sure endow her to be hi wife.

22:17 If her father utterli refus to give her unto him, he shall pay
money accord to the dowri of virgins.

22:18 thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.

22:19 whosoev lieth with a beast shall sure be put to death.

22:20 He that sacrificeth unto ani god, save unto the lord only, he
shal be utterli destroyed.

22:21 thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were
strang in the land of egypt.

22:22 Ye shall not afflict ani widow, or fatherless child.

22:23 If thou afflict them in ani wise, and they cri at all unto me, i
wil sure hear their cry; 22:24 and my wrath shall wax hot, and i
wil kill you with the sword; and your wive shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

22:25 If thou lend money to ani of my peopl that is poor by thee,
thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him
usury.

22:26 If thou at all take thi neighbour' raiment to pledge, thou
shalt deliv it unto him by that the sun goeth down: 22:27 for that
i hi cover only, it is hi raiment for hi skin: wherein shall he
sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will
hear; for I am gracious.

22:28 thou shalt not revil the gods, nor curs the ruler of thy
people.

22:29 thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thi ripe fruits, and
of thi liquors: the firstborn of thi son shalt thou give unto me.

22:30 likewis shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thi sheep:
seven day it shall be with hi dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give
it me.

22:31 and ye shall be holi men unto me: neither shall ye eat ani flesh
that is torn of beast in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.

23:1 thou shalt not rais a fals report: put not thine hand with the
wick to be an unright witness.

23:2 thou shalt not follow a multitud to do evil; neither shalt thou
speak in a caus to declin after mani to wrest judgment: 23:3 neither
shalt thou counten a poor man in hi cause.

23:4 If thou meet thine enemy' ox or hi ass go astray, thou shalt
sur bring it back to him again.

23:5 If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lie under his
burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt sure help with
him.

23:6 thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thi poor in hi cause.

23:7 keep thee far from a fals matter; and the innoc and righteous
slay thou not: for I will not justifi the wicked.

23:8 and thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and
perverteth the word of the righteous.

23:9 also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of
a stranger, see ye were stranger in the land of egypt.

23:10 and six year thou shalt sow thi land, and shalt gather in the
fruit thereof: 23:11 but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and
li still; that the poor of thi peopl may eat: and what they leave
th beast of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with
thi vineyard, and with thi oliveyard.

23:12 six day thou shalt do thi work, and on the seventh day thou
shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy
handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.

23:13 and in all thing that I have said unto you be circumspect: and
mak no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out
of thi mouth.

23:14 three time thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.

23:15 thou shalt keep the feast of unleaven bread: (thou shalt eat
unleaven bread seven days, as I command thee, in the time
appoint of the month abib; for in it thou camest out from egypt: and
non shall appear befor me empty:) 23:16 and the feast of harvest,
th firstfruit of thi labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and
th feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou
hast gather in thi labour out of the field.

23:17 three item in the year all thi male shall appear befor the
lord god.

23:18 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrific with leavened
bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrific remain until the morning.

23:19 the first of the firstfruit of thi land thou shalt bring into
th hous of the lord thi god. thou shalt not seeth a kid in his
mother' milk.

23:20 behold, I send an angel befor thee, to keep thee in the way,
and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.

23:21 bewar of him, and obey hi voice, provok him not; for he will
not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.

23:22 but if thou shalt inde obey hi voice, and do all that i
speak; then I will be an enemi unto thine enemies, and an adversary
unto thine adversaries.

23:23 for mine angel shall go befor thee, and bring thee in unto the
amorites, and the hittites, and the perizzites, and the canaanites,
th hivites, and the jebusites: and I will cut them off.

23:24 thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serv them, nor do
aft their works: but thou shalt utterli overthrow them, and quite
break down their images.

23:25 and ye shall serv the lord your god, and he shall bless thy
bread, and thi water; and I will take sick away from the midst of
thee.

23:26 there shall noth cast their young, nor be barren, in thy
land: the number of thi day I will fulfil.

23:27 I will send my fear befor thee, and will destroy all the people
to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemi turn their
back unto thee.

23:28 and I will send hornet befor thee, which shall drive out the
hivite, the canaanite, and the hittite, from befor thee.

23:29 I will not drive them out from befor thee in one year; lest the
land becom desolate, and the beast of the field multipli against
thee.

23:30 By littl and littl I will drive them out from befor thee,
until thou be increased, and inherit the land.

23:31 and I will set thi bound from the red sea even unto the sea of
th philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will
deliv the inhabit of the land into your hand; and thou shalt
driv them out befor thee.

23:32 thou shalt make no coven with them, nor with their gods.

23:33 they shall not dwell in thi land, lest they make thee sin
against me: for if thou serv their gods, it will sure be a snare
unto thee.

24:1 and he said unto moses, come up unto the lord, thou, and aaron,
nadab, and abihu, and seventi of the elder of israel; and worship ye
afar off.

24:2 and mose alon shall come near the lord: but they shall not come
nigh; neither shall the peopl go up with him.

24:3 and mose came and told the peopl all the word of the lord, and
al the judgments: and all the peopl answer with one voice, and
said, all the word which the lord hath said will we do.

24:4 and mose wrote all the word of the lord, and rose up earli in
th morning, and build an altar under the hill, and twelv pillars,
accord to the twelv tribe of israel.

24:5 and he sent young men of the children of israel, which offered
burnt offerings, and sacrif peac offer of oxen unto the lord.

24:6 and mose took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half
of the blood he sprinkl on the altar.

24:7 and he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audienc of
th people: and they said, all that the lord hath said will we do, and
b obedient.

24:8 and mose took the blood, and sprinkl it on the people, and
said, behold the blood of the covenant, which the lord hath made with
you concern all these words.

24:9 then went up moses, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventi of
th elder of israel: 24:10 and they saw the god of israel: and there
wa under hi feet as it were a pave work of a sapphir stone, and as
it were the bodi of heaven in hi clearness.

24:11 and upon the nobl of the children of israel he laid not his
hand: also they saw god, and did eat and drink.

24:12 and the lord said unto moses, come up to me into the mount, and
b there: and I will give thee tabl of stone, and a law, and
command which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 and mose rose up, and hi minist joshua: and mose went up
into the mount of god.

24:14 and he said unto the elders, tarri ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and, behold, aaron and hur are with you: if ani man
hav ani matter to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 and mose went up into the mount, and a cloud cover the mount.

24:16 and the glori of the lord abod upon mount sinai, and the cloud
cov it six days: and the seventh day he call unto mose out of
th midst of the cloud.

24:17 and the sight of the glori of the lord wa like devour fire
on the top of the mount in the eye of the children of israel.

24:18 and mose went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into
th mount: and mose wa in the mount forti day and forti nights.

25:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:2 speak unto the
children of israel, that they bring me an offering: of everi man that
giveth it willingli with hi heart ye shall take my offering.

25:3 and thi is the offer which ye shall take of them; gold, and
silver, and brass, 25:4 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 25:5 and rams' skin dy red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 25:6 oil for the light, spice for anointing
oil, and for sweet incense, 25:7 onyx stones, and stone to be set in
th ephod, and in the breastplate.

25:8 and let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.

25:9 accord to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the
tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instrument thereof, even so
shal ye make it.

25:10 and they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubit and a
half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

25:11 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without
shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round
about.

25:12 and thou shalt cast four ring of gold for it, and put them in
th four corner thereof; and two ring shall be in the one side of
it, and two ring in the other side of it.

25:13 and thou shalt make stave of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold.

25:14 and thou shalt put the stave into the ring by the side of the
ark, that the ark may be born with them.

25:15 the stave shall be in the ring of the ark: they shall not be
taken from it.

25:16 and thou shalt put into the ark the testimoni which I shall give
thee.

25:17 and thou shalt make a merci seat of pure gold: two cubit and a
half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
thereof.

25:18 and thou shalt make two cherubim of gold, of beaten work shalt
thou make them, in the two end of the merci seat.

25:19 and make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the
oth end: even of the merci seat shall ye make the cherubim on the
two end thereof.

25:20 and the cherubim shall stretch forth their wing on high,
cov the merci seat with their wings, and their face shall look
on to another; toward the merci seat shall the face of the cherubims
be.

25:21 and thou shalt put the merci seat abov upon the ark; and in the
ark thou shalt put the testimoni that I shall give thee.

25:22 and there I will meet with thee, and I will commun with thee
from abov the merci seat, from between the two cherubim which are
upon the ark of the testimony, of all thing which I will give thee in
command unto the children of israel.

25:23 thou shalt also make a tabl of shittim wood: two cubit shall
b the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit
and a half the height thereof.

25:24 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a
crown of gold round about.

25:25 and thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round
about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round
about.

25:26 and thou shalt make for it four ring of gold, and put the rings
in the four corner that are on the four feet thereof.

25:27 over against the border shall the ring be for place of the
stav to bear the table.

25:28 and thou shalt make the stave of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold, that the tabl may be born with them.

25:29 and thou shalt make the dish thereof, and spoon thereof, and
cov thereof, and bowl thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt
thou make them.

25:30 and thou shalt set upon the tabl shewbread befor me alway.

25:31 and thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work
shal the candlestick be made: hi shaft, and hi branches, hi bowls,
hi knops, and hi flowers, shall be of the same.

25:32 and six branch shall come out of the side of it; three
branch of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branch of
th candlestick out of the other side: 25:33 three bowl made like
unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls
mad like almond in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in
th six branch that come out of the candlestick.

25:34 and in the candlestick shall be four bowl made like unto
almonds, with their knop and their flowers.

25:35 and there shall be a knop under two branch of the same, and a
knop under two branch of the same, and a knop under two branch of
th same, accord to the six branch that proceed out of the
candlestick.

25:36 their knop and their branch shall be of the same: all it
shal be one beaten work of pure gold.

25:37 and thou shalt make the seven lamp thereof: and they shall
light the lamp thereof, that they may give light over against it.

25:38 and the tong thereof, and the snuffdish thereof, shall be of
pur gold.

25:39 Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these
vessels.

25:40 and look that thou make them after their pattern, which was
shew thee in the mount.

26:1 moreov thou shalt make the tabernacl with ten curtain of fine
twin linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubim of
cun work shalt thou make them.

26:2 the length of one curtain shall be eight and twenti cubits, and
th breadth of one curtain four cubits: and everi one of the curtains
shal have one measure.

26:3 the five curtain shall be coupl togeth one to another; and
oth five curtain shall be coupl one to another.

26:4 and thou shalt make loop of blue upon the edg of the one
curtain from the selvedg in the coupling; and likewis shalt thou
mak in the uttermost edg of anoth curtain, in the coupl of the
second.

26:5 fifti loop shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifti loops
shalt thou make in the edg of the curtain that is in the coupl of
th second; that the loop may take hold one of another.

26:6 and thou shalt make fifti tach of gold, and coupl the curtains
togeth with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle.

26:7 and thou shalt make curtain of goats' hair to be a cover upon
th tabernacle: eleven curtain shalt thou make.

26:8 the length of one curtain shall be thirti cubits, and the breadth
of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtain shall be all of
on measure.

26:9 and thou shalt coupl five curtain by themselves, and six
curtain by themselves, and shalt doubl the sixth curtain in the
forefront of the tabernacle.

26:10 and thou shalt make fifti loop on the edg of the one curtain
that is outmost in the coupling, and fifti loop in the edg of the
curtain which coupleth the second.

26:11 and thou shalt make fifti tach of brass, and put the taches
into the loops, and coupl the tent together, that it may be one.

26:12 and the remnant that remaineth of the curtain of the tent, the
half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backsid of the
tabernacle.

26:13 and a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of
that which remaineth in the length of the curtain of the tent, it
shal hang over the side of the tabernacl on thi side and on that
side, to cover it.

26:14 and thou shalt make a cover for the tent of rams' skin dyed
red, and a cover abov of badgers' skins.

26:15 and thou shalt make board for the tabernacl of shittim wood
stand up.

26:16 ten cubit shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a
half shall be the breadth of one board.

26:17 two tenon shall there be in one board, set in order one against
another: thu shalt thou make for all the board of the tabernacle.

26:18 and thou shalt make the board for the tabernacle, twenti boards
on the south side southward.

26:19 and thou shalt make forti socket of silver under the twenty
boards; two socket under one board for hi two tenons, and two
socket under anoth board for hi two tenons.

26:20 and for the second side of the tabernacl on the north side
ther shall be twenti boards: 26:21 and their forti socket of silver;
two socket under one board, and two socket under anoth board.

26:22 and for the side of the tabernacl westward thou shalt make six
boards.

26:23 and two board shalt thou make for the corner of the tabernacle
in the two sides.

26:24 and they shall be coupl togeth beneath, and they shall be
coupl togeth abov the head of it unto one ring: thu shall it be
for them both; they shall be for the two corners.

26:25 and they shall be eight boards, and their socket of silver,
sixteen sockets; two socket under one board, and two socket under
anoth board.

26:26 and thou shalt make bar of shittim wood; five for the board of
th one side of the tabernacle, 26:27 and five bar for the board of
th other side of the tabernacle, and five bar for the board of the
sid of the tabernacle, for the two side westward.

26:28 and the middl bar in the midst of the board shall reach from
end to end.

26:29 and thou shalt overlay the board with gold, and make their
r of gold for place for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars
with gold.

26:30 and thou shalt rear up the tabernacl accord to the fashion
thereof which wa shew thee in the mount.

26:31 and thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fin twine linen of cun work: with cherubim shall it be made:
26:32 and thou shalt hang it upon four pillar of shittim wood
overlaid with gold: their hook shall be of gold, upon the four
socket of silver.

26:33 and thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou
mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and
th vail shall divid unto you between the holi place and the most
holy.

26:34 and thou shalt put the merci seat upon the ark of the testimony
in the most holi place.

26:35 and thou shalt set the tabl without the vail, and the
candlestick over against the tabl on the side of the tabernacle
toward the south: and thou shalt put the tabl on the north side.

26:36 and thou shalt make an hang for the door of the tent, of
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twine linen, wrought with
needlework.

26:37 and thou shalt make for the hang five pillar of shittim
wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hook shall be of gold:
and thou shalt cast five socket of brass for them.

27:1 and thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubit long,
and five cubit broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height
thereof shall be three cubits.

27:2 and thou shalt make the horn of it upon the four corners
thereof: hi horn shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it
with brass.

27:3 and thou shalt make hi pan to receiv hi ashes, and his
shovels, and hi basons, and hi fleshhooks, and hi firepans: all the
vessel thereof thou shalt make of brass.

27:4 and thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon
th net shalt thou make four brasen ring in the four corner thereof.

27:5 and thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath,
that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.

27:6 and thou shalt make stave for the altar, stave of shittim wood,
and overlay them with brass.

27:7 and the stave shall be put into the rings, and the stave shall
b upon the two side of the altar, to bear it.

27:8 hollow with board shalt thou make it: as it wa shew thee in
th mount, so shall they make it.

27:9 and thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south
sid southward there shall be hang for the court of fine twined
linen of an hundr cubit long for one side: 27:10 and the twenty
pillar thereof and their twenti socket shall be of brass; the hooks
of the pillar and their fillet shall be of silver.

27:11 and likewis for the north side in length there shall be
hang of an hundr cubit long, and hi twenti pillar and their
twenti socket of brass; the hook of the pillar and their fillet of
silver.

27:12 and for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be
hang of fifti cubits: their pillar ten, and their socket ten.

27:13 and the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be
fifti cubits.

27:14 the hang of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits:
their pillar three, and their socket three.

27:15 and on the other side shall be hang fifteen cubits: their
pillar three, and their socket three.

27:16 and for the gate of the court shall be an hang of twenty
cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twine linen,
wrought with needlework: and their pillar shall be four, and their
socket four.

27:17 all the pillar round about the court shall be fillet with
silver; their hook shall be of silver, and their socket of brass.

27:18 the length of the court shall be an hundr cubits, and the
breadth fifti everi where, and the height five cubit of fine twined
linen, and their socket of brass.

27:19 all the vessel of the tabernacl in all the servic thereof,
and all the pin thereof, and all the pin of the court, shall be of
brass.

27:20 and thou shalt command the children of israel, that they bring
the pure oil oliv beaten for the light, to caus the lamp to burn
always.

27:21 In the tabernacl of the congreg without the vail, which is
befor the testimony, aaron and hi son shall order it from evening
to morn befor the lord: it shall be a statut for ever unto their
gener on the behalf of the children of israel.

28:1 and take thou unto thee aaron thi brother, and hi son with him,
from among the children of israel, that he may minist unto me in the
priest' office, even aaron, nadab and abihu, eleazar and ithamar,
aaron' sons.

28:2 and thou shalt make holi garment for aaron thi brother for glory
and for beauty.

28:3 and thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have
fil with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make aaron' garments
to consecr him, that he may minist unto me in the priest's
office.

28:4 and these are the garment which they shall make; a breastplate,
and an ephod, and a robe, and a broider coat, a mitre, and a girdle:
and they shall make holi garment for aaron thi brother, and hi sons,
that he may minist unto me in the priest' office.

28:5 and they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fin linen.

28:6 and they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of
scarlet, and fine twine linen, with cun work.

28:7 It shall have the two shoulderpiec thereof join at the two
edg thereof; and so it shall be join together.

28:8 and the curiou girdl of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be
of the same, accord to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twine linen.

28:9 and thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names
of the children of israel: 28:10 six of their name on one stone, and
th other six name of the rest on the other stone, accord to their
birth.

28:11 with the work of an engrav in stone, like the engrav of a
signet, shalt thou engrav the two stone with the name of the
children of israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouch of gold.

28:12 and thou shalt put the two stone upon the shoulder of the
ephod for stone of memori unto the children of israel: and aaron
shal bear their name befor the lord upon hi two shoulder for a
memorial.

28:13 and thou shalt make ouch of gold; 28:14 and two chain of pure
gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten
th wreathen chain to the ouches.

28:15 and thou shalt make the breastplat of judgment with cunning
work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twine linen, shalt
thou make it.

28:16 foursquar it shall be be doubled; a span shall be the length
thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof.

28:17 and thou shalt set in it set of stones, even four row of
stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle:
thi shall be the first row.

28:18 and the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a
diamond.

28:19 and the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

28:20 and the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they
shal be set in gold in their inclosings.

28:21 and the stone shall be with the name of the children of
israel, twelve, accord to their names, like the engrav of a
signet; everi one with hi name shall they be accord to the twelve
tribes.

28:22 and thou shalt make upon the breastplat chain at the end of
wreathen work of pure gold.

28:23 and thou shalt make upon the breastplat two ring of gold, and
shalt put the two ring on the two end of the breastplate.

28:24 and thou shalt put the two wreathen chain of gold in the two
r which are on the end of the breastplate.

28:25 and the other two end of the two wreathen chain thou shalt
fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpiec of the
ephod befor it.

28:26 and thou shalt make two ring of gold, and thou shalt put them
upon the two end of the breastplat in the border thereof, which is
in the side of the ephod inward.

28:27 and two other ring of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them
on the two side of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof,
ov against the other coupl thereof, abov the curiou girdl of
th ephod.

28:28 and they shall bind the breastplat by the ring thereof unto
th ring of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be abov the
curi girdl of the ephod, and that the breastplat be not loosed
from the ephod.

28:29 and aaron shall bear the name of the children of israel in the
breastpl of judgment upon hi heart, when he goeth in unto the holy
place, for a memori befor the lord continually.

28:30 and thou shalt put in the breastplat of judgment the urim and
th thummim; and they shall be upon aaron' heart, when he goeth in
befor the lord: and aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of
israel upon hi heart befor the lord continually.

28:31 and thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.

28:32 and there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst
thereof: it shall have a bind of woven work round about the hole of
it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.

28:33 and beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegran of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and
bel of gold between them round about: 28:34 A golden bell and a
pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe
round about.

28:35 and it shall be upon aaron to minister: and hi sound shall be
heard when he goeth in unto the holi place befor the lord, and when
h cometh out, that he die not.

28:36 and thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it,
lik the engrav of a signet, holi TO the lord.

28:37 and thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the
mitre; upon the forefront of the mitr it shall be.

28:38 and it shall be upon aaron' forehead, that aaron may bear the
iniqu of the holi things, which the children of israel shall hallow
in all their holi gifts; and it shall be alway upon hi forehead,
that they may be accept befor the lord.

28:39 and thou shalt embroid the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt
mak the mitr of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdl of
needlework.

28:40 and for aaron' son thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make
for them girdles, and bonnet shalt thou make for them, for glori and
for beauty.

28:41 and thou shalt put them upon aaron thi brother, and hi sons
with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecr them, and sanctify
them, that they may minist unto me in the priest' office.

28:42 and thou shalt make them linen breech to cover their
nakedness; from the loin even unto the thigh they shall reach: 28:43
and they shall be upon aaron, and upon hi sons, when they come in
unto the tabernacl of the congregation, or when they come near unto
th altar to minist in the holi place; that they bear not iniquity,
and die: it shall be a statut for ever unto him and hi seed after
him.

29:1 and thi is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow
them, to minist unto me in the priest' office: take one young
bullock, and two ram without blemish, 29:2 and unleaven bread, and
cak unleaven temper with oil, and wafer unleaven anointed
with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.

29:3 and thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the
basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

29:4 and aaron and hi son thou shalt bring unto the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.

29:5 and thou shalt take the garments, and put upon aaron the coat,
and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and
gird him with the curiou girdl of the ephod: 29:6 and thou shalt put
th mitr upon hi head, and put the holi crown upon the mitre.

29:7 then shalt thou take the anoint oil, and pour it upon his
head, and anoint him.

29:8 and thou shalt bring hi sons, and put coat upon them.

29:9 and thou shalt gird them with girdles, aaron and hi sons, and
put the bonnet on them: and the priest' offic shall be their for a
perpetu statute: and thou shalt consecr aaron and hi sons.

29:10 and thou shalt caus a bullock to be brought befor the
tabernacl of the congregation: and aaron and hi son shall put their
hand upon the head of the bullock.

29:11 and thou shalt kill the bullock befor the lord, by the door of
th tabernacl of the congregation.

29:12 and thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon
th horn of the altar with thi finger, and pour all the blood beside
th bottom of the altar.

29:13 and thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and
th caul that is abov the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat
that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.

29:14 but the flesh of the bullock, and hi skin, and hi dung, shalt
thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.

29:15 thou shalt also take one ram; and aaron and hi son shall put
their hand upon the head of the ram.

29:16 and thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take hi blood, and
sprinkl it round about upon the altar.

29:17 and thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inward of
him, and hi legs, and put them unto hi pieces, and unto hi head.

29:18 and thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt
off unto the lord: it is a sweet savour, an offer made by fire
unto the lord.

29:19 and thou shalt take the other ram; and aaron and hi son shall
put their hand upon the head of the ram.

29:20 then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of hi blood, and put it
upon the tip of the right ear of aaron, and upon the tip of the right
ear of hi sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the
great toe of their right foot, and sprinkl the blood upon the altar
round about.

29:21 and thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of
th anoint oil, and sprinkl it upon aaron, and upon hi garments,
and upon hi sons, and upon the garment of hi son with him: and he
shal be hallowed, and hi garments, and hi sons, and hi sons'
gar with him.

29:22 also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the
fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul abov the liver, and the
two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder;
for it is a ram of consecration: 29:23 and one loaf of bread, and one
cak of oil bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened
bread that is befor the lord: 29:24 and thou shalt put all in the
hand of aaron, and in the hand of hi sons; and shalt wave them for
a wave offer befor the lord.

29:25 and thou shalt receiv them of their hands, and burn them upon
th altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour befor the lord: it
i an offer made by fire unto the lord.

29:26 and thou shalt take the breast of the ram of aaron's
consecration, and wave it for a wave offer befor the lord: and it
shal be thi part.

29:27 and thou shalt sanctifi the breast of the wave offering, and the
should of the heav offering, which is waved, and which is heaved
up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for aaron,
and of that which is for hi sons: 29:28 and it shall be aaron' and
hi sons' by a statut for ever from the children of israel: for it is
an heav offering: and it shall be an heav offer from the children
of israel of the sacrific of their peac offerings, even their heave
off unto the lord.

29:29 and the holi garment of aaron shall be hi sons' after him, to
b anoint therein, and to be consecr in them.

29:30 and that son that is priest in hi stead shall put them on seven
days, when he cometh into the tabernacl of the congreg to
minist in the holi place.

29:31 and thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seeth his
flesh in the holi place.

29:32 and aaron and hi son shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the
bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacl of the
congregation.

29:33 and they shall eat those thing wherewith the aton was
made, to consecr and to sanctifi them: but a stranger shall not eat
thereof, becaus they are holy.

29:34 and if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread,
remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remaind with fire:
it shall not be eaten, becaus it is holy.

29:35 and thu shalt thou do unto aaron, and to hi sons, accord to
al thing which I have command thee: seven day shalt thou
consecr them.

29:36 and thou shalt offer everi day a bullock for a sin offer for
atonement: and thou shalt cleans the altar, when thou hast made an
aton for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctifi it.

29:37 seven day thou shalt make an aton for the altar, and
sanctifi it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoev toucheth
th altar shall be holy.

29:38 now thi is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two
lamb of the first year day by day continually.

29:39 the one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb
thou shalt offer at even: 29:40 and with the one lamb a tenth deal of
flour mingl with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the
fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering.

29:41 and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do
thereto accord to the meat offer of the morning, and according
to the drink offer thereof, for a sweet savour, an offer made by
fir unto the lord.

29:42 thi shall be a continu burnt offer throughout your
gener at the door of the tabernacl of the congreg before
th lord: where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.

29:43 and there I will meet with the children of israel, and the
tabernacl shall be sanctifi by my glory.

29:44 and I will sanctifi the tabernacl of the congregation, and the
altar: I will sanctifi also both aaron and hi sons, to minist to me
in the priest' office.

29:45 and I will dwell among the children of israel, and will be their
god.

29:46 and they shall know that I am the lord their god, that brought
them forth out of the land of egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am
th lord their god.

30:1 and thou shalt make an altar to burn incens upon: of shittim
wood shalt thou make it.

30:2 A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth
thereof; foursquar shall it be: and two cubit shall be the height
thereof: the horn thereof shall be of the same.

30:3 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and
th side thereof round about, and the horn thereof; and thou shalt
mak unto it a crown of gold round about.

30:4 and two golden ring shalt thou make to it under the crown of it,
bi the two corner thereof, upon the two side of it shalt thou make
it; and they shall be for place for the stave to bear it withal.

30:5 and thou shalt make the stave of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold.

30:6 and thou shalt put it befor the vail that is by the ark of the
testimony, befor the merci seat that is over the testimony, where i
wil meet with thee.

30:7 and aaron shall burn thereon sweet incens everi morning: when he
dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incens upon it.

30:8 and when aaron lighteth the lamp at even, he shall burn incense
upon it, a perpetu incens befor the lord throughout your
generations.

30:9 Ye shall offer no strang incens thereon, nor burnt sacrifice,
nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offer thereon.

30:10 and aaron shall make an aton upon the horn of it onc in a
year with the blood of the sin offer of atonements: onc in the
year shall he make aton upon it throughout your generations: it
i most holi unto the lord.

30:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:12 when thou takest
th sum of the children of israel after their number, then shall they
giv everi man a ransom for hi soul unto the lord, when thou
numberest them; that there be no plagu among them, when thou
numberest them.

30:13 thi they shall give, everi one that passeth among them that are
numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel
i twenti gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offer of the lord.

30:14 everi one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty
year old and above, shall give an offer unto the lord.

30:15 the rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less
than half a shekel, when they give an offer unto the lord, to make
an aton for your souls.

30:16 and thou shalt take the aton money of the children of
israel, and shalt appoint it for the servic of the tabernacl of the
congregation; that it may be a memori unto the children of israel
befor the lord, to make an aton for your souls.

30:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:18 thou shalt also
mak a laver of brass, and hi foot also of brass, to wash withal: and
thou shalt put it between the tabernacl of the congreg and the
altar, and thou shalt put water therein.

30:19 for aaron and hi son shall wash their hand and their feet
thereat: 30:20 when they go into the tabernacl of the congregation,
they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near
to the altar to minister, to burn offer made by fire unto the lord:
30:21 So they shall wash their hand and their feet, that they die
not: and it shall be a statut for ever to them, even to him and to
hi seed throughout their generations.

30:22 moreov the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:23 take thou also
unto thee princip spices, of pure myrrh five hundr shekels, and of
sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundr and fifti shekels, and
of sweet calamu two hundr and fifti shekels, 30:24 and of cassia
f hundr shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil
ol an hin: 30:25 and thou shalt make it an oil of holi ointment, an
oint compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy
anoint oil.

30:26 and thou shalt anoint the tabernacl of the congregation
therewith, and the ark of the testimony, 30:27 and the tabl and all
hi vessels, and the candlestick and hi vessels, and the altar of
incense, 30:28 and the altar of burnt offer with all hi vessels,
and the laver and hi foot.

30:29 and thou shalt sanctifi them, that they may be most holy:
whatsoev toucheth them shall be holy.

30:30 and thou shalt anoint aaron and hi sons, and consecr them,
that they may minist unto me in the priest' office.

30:31 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, this
shal be an holi anoint oil unto me throughout your generations.

30:32 upon man' flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make
ani other like it, after the composit of it: it is holy, and it
shal be holi unto you.

30:33 whosoev compoundeth ani like it, or whosoev putteth ani of
it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from hi people.

30:34 and the lord said unto moses, take unto thee sweet spices,
stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spice with pure
frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight: 30:35 and thou
shalt make it a perfume, a confect after the art of the apothecary,
temp together, pure and holy: 30:36 and thou shalt beat some of it
veri small, and put of it befor the testimoni in the tabernacl of
th congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you
most holy.

30:37 and as for the perfum which thou shalt make, ye shall not make
to yourselv accord to the composit thereof: it shall be unto
the holi for the lord.

30:38 whosoev shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall
even be cut off from hi people.

31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 see, I have call by
nam bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah:
31:3 and I have fill him with the spirit of god, in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
31:4 To devis cun works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, 31:5 and in cut of stones, to set them, and in carv of
timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.

31:6 and I, behold, I have given with him aholiab, the son of
ahisamach, of the tribe of dan: and in the heart of all that are wise
heart I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have
command thee; 31:7 the tabernacl of the congregation, and the ark
of the testimony, and the merci seat that is thereupon, and all the
furnitur of the tabernacle, 31:8 and the tabl and hi furniture, and
th pure candlestick with all hi furniture, and the altar of incense,
31:9 and the altar of burnt offer with all hi furniture, and the
lav and hi foot, 31:10 and the cloth of service, and the holy
gar for aaron the priest, and the garment of hi sons, to
minist in the priest' office, 31:11 and the anoint oil, and
sweet incens for the holi place: accord to all that I have
command thee shall they do.

31:12 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:13 speak thou also
unto the children of israel, saying, verili my sabbath ye shall keep:
for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that
y may know that I am the lord that doth sanctifi you.

31:14 Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holi unto you:
everi one that defileth it shall sure be put to death: for whosoever
doeth ani work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his
people.

31:15 six day may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of
rest, holi to the lord: whosoev doeth ani work in the sabbath day,
h shall sure be put to death.

31:16 wherefor the children of israel shall keep the sabbath, to
observ the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual
covenant.

31:17 It is a sign between me and the children of israel for ever: for
in six day the lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and wa refreshed.

31:18 and he gave unto moses, when he had made an end of communing
with him upon mount sinai, two tabl of testimony, tabl of stone,
written with the finger of god.

32:1 and when the peopl saw that mose delay to come down out of
th mount, the peopl gather themselv togeth unto aaron, and
said unto him, up, make us gods, which shall go befor us; for as for
thi moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we
wot not what is becom of him.

32:2 and aaron said unto them, break off the golden earrings, which
ar in the ear of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters,
and bring them unto me.

32:3 and all the peopl brake off the golden ear which were in
their ears, and brought them unto aaron.

32:4 and he receiv them at their hand, and fashion it with a
grav tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, these
b thi gods, O israel, which brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:5 and when aaron saw it, he built an altar befor it; and aaron
mad proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the lord.

32:6 and they rose up earli on the morrow, and offer burnt
offerings, and brought peac offerings; and the peopl sat down to eat
and to drink, and rose up to play.

32:7 and the lord said unto moses, go, get thee down; for thi people,
which thou broughtest out of the land of egypt, have corrupted
themselves: 32:8 they have turn asid quickli out of the way which i
command them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped
it, and have sacrif thereunto, and said, these be thi gods, o
israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:9 and the lord said unto moses, I have seen thi people, and,
behold, it is a stiffneck people: 32:10 now therefor let me alone,
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consum them:
and I will make of thee a great nation.

32:11 and mose besought the lord hi god, and said, lord, whi doth
thi wrath wax hot against thi people, which thou hast brought forth
out of the land of egypt with great power, and with a mighti hand?
32:12 wherefor should the egyptian speak, and say, for mischief did
h bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consum them
from the face of the earth? turn from thi fierc wrath, and repent of
thi evil against thi people.

32:13 rememb abraham, isaac, and israel, thi servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multipli your
se as the star of heaven, and all thi land that I have spoken of
wil I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 and the lord repent of the evil which he thought to do unto
hi people.

32:15 and mose turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tabl of the testimoni were in hi hand: the tabl were written on
both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

32:16 and the tabl were the work of god, and the write wa the
writ of god, graven upon the tables.

32:17 and when joshua heard the nois of the peopl as they shouted,
h said unto moses, there is a nois of war in the camp.

32:18 and he said, It is not the voic of them that shout for mastery,
neith is it the voic of them that cri for be overcome: but the
nois of them that sing do I hear.

32:19 and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that
h saw the calf, and the dancing: and moses' anger wax hot, and he
cast the tabl out of hi hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

32:20 and he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder, and straw it upon the water, and made
th children of israel drink of it.

32:21 and mose said unto aaron, what did thi peopl unto thee, that
thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?  32:22 and aaron said, let
not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they
ar set on mischief.

32:23 for they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go befor us:
for as for thi moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of
egypt, we wot not what is becom of him.

32:24 and I said unto them, whosoev hath ani gold, let them break it
off. So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came
out thi calf.

32:25 and when mose saw that the peopl were naked; (for aaron had
mad them nake unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 then
mos stood in the gate of the camp, and said, who is on the lord's
side? let him come unto me. and all the son of levi gathered
themselv togeth unto him.

32:27 and he said unto them, thu saith the lord god of israel, put
everi man hi sword by hi side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay everi man hi brother, and everi man his
companion, and everi man hi neighbour.

32:28 and the children of levi did accord to the word of moses: and
ther fell of the peopl that day about three thousand men.

32:29 for mose had said, consecr yourselv today to the lord,
even everi man upon hi son, and upon hi brother; that he may bestow
upon you a bless thi day.

32:30 and it came to pass on the morrow, that mose said unto the
people, Ye have sin a great sin: and now I will go up unto the
lord; peradventur I shall make an aton for your sin.

32:31 and mose return unto the lord, and said, oh, thi peopl have
sin a great sin, and have made them god of gold.

32:32 yet now, if thou wilt forgiv their sin--; and if not, blot me,
i pray thee, out of thi book which thou hast written.

32:33 and the lord said unto moses, whosoev hath sin against me,
him will I blot out of my book.

32:34 therefor now go, lead the peopl unto the place of which I have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go befor thee:
nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagu the people, becaus they made the calf,
which aaron made.

33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and
th peopl which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto
th land which I sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying,
unto thi seed will I give it: 33:2 and I will send an angel before
thee; and I will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a
land flow with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of
thee; for thou art a stiffneck people: lest I consum thee in the
way.

33:4 and when the peopl heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and
no man did put on him hi ornaments.

33:5 for the lord had said unto moses, say unto the children of
israel, Ye are a stiffneck people: I will come up into the midst of
the in a moment, and consum thee: therefor now put off thy
orna from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.

33:6 and the children of israel strip themselv of their ornaments
bi the mount horeb.

33:7 and mose took the tabernacle, and pitch it without the camp,
afar off from the camp, and call it the tabernacl of the
congregation. and it came to pass, that everi one which sought the
lord went out unto the tabernacl of the congregation, which was
without the camp.

33:8 and it came to pass, when mose went out unto the tabernacle,
that all the peopl rose up, and stood everi man at hi tent door, and
look after moses, until he wa gone into the tabernacle.

33:9 and it came to pass, as mose enter into the tabernacle, the
cloudi pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and
th lord talk with moses.

33:10 and all the peopl saw the cloudi pillar stand at the tabernacle
door: and all the peopl rose up and worshipped, everi man in hi tent
door.

33:11 and the lord spake unto mose face to face, as a man speaketh
unto hi friend. and he turn again into the camp: but hi servant
joshua, the son of nun, a young man, depart not out of the
tabernacle.

33:12 and mose said unto the lord, see, thou sayest unto me, bring up
thi people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with
me. yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found
grac in my sight.

33:13 now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thi sight,
shew me now thi way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in
thi sight: and consid that thi nation is thi people.

33:14 and he said, My presenc shall go with thee, and I will give
the rest.

33:15 and he said unto him, If thi presenc go not with me, carri us
not up hence.

33:16 for wherein shall it be known here that I and thi peopl have
found grace in thi sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so
shal we be separated, I and thi people, from all the peopl that are
upon the face of the earth.

33:17 and the lord said unto moses, I will do thi thing also that
thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know
the by name.

33:18 and he said, I beseech thee, shew me thi glory.

33:19 and he said, I will make all my good pass befor thee, and i
wil proclaim the name of the lord befor thee; and will be gracious
to whom I will be gracious, and will shew merci on whom I will shew
mercy.

33:20 and he said, thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man
se me, and live.

33:21 and the lord said, behold, there is a place by me, and thou
shalt stand upon a rock: 33:22 and it shall come to pass, while my
glori passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and
wil cover thee with my hand while I pass by: 33:23 and I will take
away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall
not be seen.

34:1 and the lord said unto moses, hew thee two tabl of stone like
unto the first: and I will write upon these tabl the word that were
in the first tables, which thou brakest.

34:2 and be readi in the morning, and come up in the morn unto
mount sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

34:3 and no man shall come up with thee, neither let ani man be seen
throughout all the mount; neither let the flock nor herd feed before
that mount.

34:4 and he hew two tabl of stone like unto the first; and moses
ros up earli in the morning, and went up unto mount sinai, as the
lord had command him, and took in hi hand the two tabl of stone.

34:5 and the lord descend in the cloud, and stood with him there,
and proclaim the name of the lord.

34:6 and the lord pass by befor him, and proclaimed, the lord, the
lord god, merci and gracious, longsuffering, and abund in
good and truth, 34:7 keep merci for thousands, forgiving
iniqu and transgress and sin, and that will by no mean clear
th guilty; visit the iniqu of the father upon the children,
and upon the children' children, unto the third and to the fourth
generation.

34:8 and mose made haste, and bow hi head toward the earth, and
worshipped.

34:9 and he said, If now I have found grace in thi sight, O lord, let
mi lord, I pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffneck people; and
pardon our iniqu and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

34:10 and he said, behold, I make a covenant: befor all thi peopl i
wil do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in
ani nation: and all the peopl among which thou art shall see the work
of the lord: for it is a terribl thing that I will do with thee.

34:11 observ thou that which I command thee thi day: behold, I drive
out befor thee the amorite, and the canaanite, and the hittite, and
th perizzite, and the hivite, and the jebusite.

34:12 take heed to thyself, lest thou make a coven with the
inhabit of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in
th midst of thee: 34:13 but ye shall destroy their altars, break
their images, and cut down their groves: 34:14 for thou shalt worship
no other god: for the lord, whose name is jealous, is a jealou god:
34:15 lest thou make a coven with the inhabit of the land, and
they go a whore after their gods, and do sacrific unto their gods,
and one call thee, and thou eat of hi sacrifice; 34:16 and thou take
of their daughter unto thi sons, and their daughter go a whoring
aft their gods, and make thi son go a whore after their gods.

34:17 thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

34:18 the feast of unleaven bread shalt thou keep. seven day thou
shalt eat unleaven bread, as I command thee, in the time of the
month abib: for in the month abib thou camest out from egypt.

34:19 all that openeth the matrix is mine; and everi firstl among
thi cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.

34:20 but the firstl of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and
if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break hi neck. all the
firstborn of thi son thou shalt redeem. and none shall appear before
m empty.

34:21 six day thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt
rest: in ear time and in harvest thou shalt rest.

34:22 and thou shalt observ the feast of weeks, of the firstfruit of
wheat harvest, and the feast of ingath at the year' end.

34:23 thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear befor the
lord god, the god of israel.

34:24 for I will cast out the nation befor thee, and enlarg thy
borders: neither shall ani man desir thi land, when thou shalt go up
to appear befor the lord thi god thrice in the year.

34:25 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrific with leaven;
neith shall the sacrific of the feast of the passov be left unto
th morning.

34:26 the first of the firstfruit of thi land thou shalt bring unto
th hous of the lord thi god. thou shalt not seeth a kid in his
mother' milk.

34:27 and the lord said unto moses, write thou these words: for after
th tenor of these word I have made a coven with thee and with
israel.

34:28 and he wa there with the lord forti day and forti nights; he
did neither eat bread, nor drink water. and he wrote upon the tables
th word of the covenant, the ten commandments.

34:29 and it came to pass, when mose came down from mount sinai with
th two tabl of testimoni in moses' hand, when he came down from the
mount, that mose wist not that the skin of hi face shone while he
talk with him.

34:30 and when aaron and all the children of israel saw moses, behold,
th skin of hi face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

34:31 and mose call unto them; and aaron and all the ruler of the
congreg return unto him: and mose talk with them.

34:32 and afterward all the children of israel came nigh: and he gave
them in command all that the lord had spoken with him in mount
sinai.

34:33 and till mose had done speak with them, he put a vail on his
face.

34:34 but when mose went in befor the lord to speak with him, he
took the vail off, until he came out. and he came out, and spake unto
th children of israel that which he wa commanded.

34:35 and the children of israel saw the face of moses, that the skin
of moses' face shone: and mose put the vail upon hi face again,
until he went in to speak with him.

35:1 and mose gather all the congreg of the children of israel
together, and said unto them, these are the word which the lord hath
commanded, that ye should do them.

35:2 six day shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall
b to you an holi day, a sabbath of rest to the lord: whosoev doeth
work therein shall be put to death.

35:3 Ye shall kindl no fire throughout your habit upon the
sabbath day.

35:4 and mose spake unto all the congreg of the children of
israel, saying, thi is the thing which the lord commanded, saying,
35:5 take ye from among you an offer unto the lord: whosoev is of
a will heart, let him bring it, an offer of the lord; gold, and
silver, and brass, 35:6 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 35:7 and rams' skin dy red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 35:8 and oil for the light, and spice for
anoint oil, and for the sweet incense, 35:9 and onyx stones, and
ston to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.

35:10 and everi wise heart among you shall come, and make all that
th lord hath commanded; 35:11 the tabernacle, hi tent, and his
covering, hi taches, and hi boards, hi bars, hi pillars, and his
sockets, 35:12 the ark, and the stave thereof, with the merci seat,
and the vail of the covering, 35:13 the table, and hi staves, and all
hi vessels, and the shewbread, 35:14 the candlestick also for the
light, and hi furniture, and hi lamps, with the oil for the light,
35:15 and the incens altar, and hi staves, and the anoint oil,
and the sweet incense, and the hang for the door at the enter in
of the tabernacle, 35:16 the altar of burnt offering, with hi brasen
grate, hi staves, and all hi vessels, the laver and hi foot, 35:17
the hang of the court, hi pillars, and their sockets, and the
hang for the door of the court, 35:18 the pin of the tabernacle,
and the pin of the court, and their cords, 35:19 the cloth of
service, to do servic in the holi place, the holi garment for aaron
th priest, and the garment of hi sons, to minist in the priest's
office.

35:20 and all the congreg of the children of israel depart from
th presenc of moses.

35:21 and they came, everi one whose heart stir him up, and every
on whom hi spirit made willing, and they brought the lord' offering
to the work of the tabernacl of the congregation, and for all his
service, and for the holi garments.

35:22 and they came, both men and women, as mani as were willing
hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets,
al jewel of gold: and everi man that offer offer an offer of
gold unto the lord.

35:23 and everi man, with whom wa found blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skin of rams, and
badgers' skins, brought them.

35:24 everi one that did offer an offer of silver and brass brought
th lord' offering: and everi man, with whom wa found shittim wood
for ani work of the service, brought it.

35:25 and all the women that were wise heart did spin with their
hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of
purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.

35:26 and all the women whose heart stir them up in wisdom spun
goats' hair.

35:27 and the ruler brought onyx stones, and stone to be set, for
th ephod, and for the breastplate; 35:28 and spice, and oil for the
light, and for the anoint oil, and for the sweet incense.

35:29 the children of israel brought a will offer unto the lord,
everi man and woman, whose heart made them will to bring for all
mann of work, which the lord had command to be made by the hand of
moses.

35:30 and mose said unto the children of israel, see, the lord hath
cal by name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe
of judah; 35:31 and he hath fill him with the spirit of god, in
wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
workmanship; 35:32 and to devis curiou works, to work in gold, and
in silver, and in brass, 35:33 and in the cut of stones, to set
them, and in carv of wood, to make ani manner of cun work.

35:34 and he hath put in hi heart that he may teach, both he, and
aholiab, the son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan.

35:35 them hath he fill with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of
work, of the engraver, and of the cun workman, and of the
embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen,
and of the weaver, even of them that do ani work, and of those that
devis cun work.

36:1 then wrought bezaleel and aholiab, and everi wise heart man, in
whom the lord put wisdom and understand to know how to work all
mann of work for the servic of the sanctuary, accord to all that
th lord had commanded.

36:2 and mose call bezaleel and aholiab, and everi wise hearted
man, in whose heart the lord had put wisdom, even everi one whose
heart stir him up to come unto the work to do it: 36:3 and they
receiv of mose all the offering, which the children of israel had
brought for the work of the servic of the sanctuary, to make it
withal. and they brought yet unto him free offer everi morning.

36:4 and all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary,
cam everi man from hi work which they made; 36:5 and they spake unto
moses, saying, the peopl bring much more than enough for the service
of the work, which the lord command to make.

36:6 and mose gave commandment, and they caus it to be proclaimed
throughout the camp, saying, let neither man nor woman make ani more
work for the offer of the sanctuary. So the peopl were restrained
from bringing.

36:7 for the stuff they had wa suffici for all the work to make
it, and too much.

36:8 and everi wise heart man among them that wrought the work of
th tabernacl made ten curtain of fine twine linen, and blue, and
purple, and scarlet: with cherubim of cun work made he them.

36:9 the length of one curtain wa twenti and eight cubits, and the
breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtain were all of one size.

36:10 and he coupl the five curtain one unto another: and the other
f curtain he coupl one unto another.

36:11 and he made loop of blue on the edg of one curtain from the
selvedg in the coupling: likewis he made in the uttermost side of
anoth curtain, in the coupl of the second.

36:12 fifti loop made he in one curtain, and fifti loop made he in
th edg of the curtain which wa in the coupl of the second: the
loop held one curtain to another.

36:13 and he made fifti tach of gold, and coupl the curtain one
unto anoth with the taches: so it becam one tabernacle.

36:14 and he made curtain of goats' hair for the tent over the
tabernacle: eleven curtain he made them.

36:15 the length of one curtain wa thirti cubits, and four cubit was
th breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtain were of one size.

36:16 and he coupl five curtain by themselves, and six curtain by
themselves.

36:17 and he made fifti loop upon the uttermost edg of the curtain
in the coupling, and fifti loop made he upon the edg of the curtain
which coupleth the second.

36:18 and he made fifti tach of brass to coupl the tent together,
that it might be one.

36:19 and he made a cover for the tent of rams' skin dy red, and
a cover of badgers' skin abov that.

36:20 and he made board for the tabernacl of shittim wood, standing
up.

36:21 the length of a board wa ten cubits, and the breadth of a board
on cubit and a half.

36:22 one board had two tenons, equal distant one from another: thus
did he make for all the board of the tabernacle.

36:23 and he made board for the tabernacle; twenti board for the
south side southward: 36:24 and forti socket of silver he made under
th twenti boards; two socket under one board for hi two tenons, and
two socket under anoth board for hi two tenons.

36:25 and for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the
north corner, he made twenti boards, 36:26 and their forti socket of
silver; two socket under one board, and two socket under another
board.

36:27 and for the side of the tabernacl westward he made six boards.

36:28 and two board made he for the corner of the tabernacl in the
two sides.

36:29 and they were coupl beneath, and coupl togeth at the head
thereof, to one ring: thu he did to both of them in both the corners.

36:30 and there were eight boards; and their socket were sixteen
socket of silver, under everi board two sockets.

36:31 and he made bar of shittim wood; five for the board of the one
sid of the tabernacle, 36:32 and five bar for the board of the
oth side of the tabernacle, and five bar for the board of the
tabernacl for the side westward.

36:33 and he made the middl bar to shoot through the board from the
on end to the other.

36:34 and he overlaid the board with gold, and made their ring of
gold to be place for the bars, and overlaid the bar with gold.

36:35 and he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twin linen: with cherubim made he it of cun work.

36:36 and he made thereunto four pillar of shittim wood, and overlaid
them with gold: their hook were of gold; and he cast for them four
socket of silver.

36:37 and he made an hang for the tabernacl door of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twine linen, of needlework; 36:38 and
th five pillar of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their
chapit and their fillet with gold: but their five socket were of
brass.

37:1 and bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubit and a half
wa the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a
cubit and a half the height of it: 37:2 and he overlaid it with pure
gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.

37:3 and he cast for it four ring of gold, to be set by the four
corn of it; even two ring upon the one side of it, and two rings
upon the other side of it.

37:4 and he made stave of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.

37:5 and he put the stave into the ring by the side of the ark, to
bear the ark.

37:6 and he made the merci seat of pure gold: two cubit and a half
wa the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

37:7 and he made two cherubim of gold, beaten out of one piec made
h them, on the two end of the merci seat; 37:8 one cherub on the end
on thi side, and anoth cherub on the other end on that side: out of
th merci seat made he the cherubim on the two end thereof.

37:9 and the cherubim spread out their wing on high, and covered
with their wing over the merci seat, with their face one to another;
even to the merci seatward were the face of the cherubims.

37:10 and he made the tabl of shittim wood: two cubit wa the length
thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the
height thereof: 37:11 and he overlaid it with pure gold, and made
thereunto a crown of gold round about.

37:12 also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about;
and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.

37:13 and he cast for it four ring of gold, and put the ring upon
th four corner that were in the four feet thereof.

37:14 over against the border were the rings, the place for the
stav to bear the table.

37:15 and he made the stave of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
gold, to bear the table.

37:16 and he made the vessel which were upon the table, hi dishes,
and hi spoons, and hi bowls, and hi cover to cover withal, of pure
gold.

37:17 and he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he
th candlestick; hi shaft, and hi branch, hi bowls, hi knops, and
hi flowers, were of the same: 37:18 and six branch go out of the
sid thereof; three branch of the candlestick out of the one side
thereof, and three branch of the candlestick out of the other side
thereof: 37:19 three bowl made after the fashion of almond in one
branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowl made like almond in
anoth branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches
go out of the candlestick.

37:20 and in the candlestick were four bowl made like almonds, his
knops, and hi flowers: 37:21 and a knop under two branch of the
same, and a knop under two branch of the same, and a knop under two
branch of the same, accord to the six branch go out of it.

37:22 their knop and their branch were of the same: all of it was
on beaten work of pure gold.

37:23 and he made hi seven lamps, and hi snuffers, and his
snuffdishes, of pure gold.

37:24 Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels
thereof.

37:25 and he made the incens altar of shittim wood: the length of it
wa a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it wa foursquare; and two
cubit wa the height of it; the horn thereof were of the same.

37:26 and he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the
sid thereof round about, and the horn of it: also he made unto it a
crown of gold round about.

37:27 and he made two ring of gold for it under the crown thereof, by
th two corner of it, upon the two side thereof, to be place for
th stave to bear it withal.

37:28 and he made the stave of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
gold.

37:29 and he made the holi anoint oil, and the pure incens of
sweet spices, accord to the work of the apothecary.

38:1 and he made the altar of burnt offer of shittim wood: five
cubit wa the length thereof, and five cubit the breadth thereof; it
wa foursquare; and three cubit the height thereof.

38:2 and he made the horn thereof on the four corner of it; the
horn thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.

38:3 and he made all the vessel of the altar, the pots, and the
shovels, and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the
vessel thereof made he of brass.

38:4 and he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the
compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.

38:5 and he cast four ring for the four end of the grate of brass,
to be place for the staves.

38:6 and he made the stave of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
brass.

38:7 and he put the stave into the ring on the side of the altar,
to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards.

38:8 and he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of
th lookingglass of the women assembling, which assembl at the
door of the tabernacl of the congregation.

38:9 and he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings
of the court were of fine twine linen, an hundr cubits: 38:10 their
pillar were twenty, and their brasen socket twenty; the hook of the
pillar and their fillet were of silver.

38:11 and for the north side the hang were an hundr cubits,
their pillar were twenty, and their socket of brass twenty; the
hook of the pillar and their fillet of silver.

38:12 and for the west side were hang of fifti cubits, their
pillar ten, and their socket ten; the hook of the pillar and their
fillet of silver.

38:13 and for the east side eastward fifti cubits.

38:14 the hang of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits;
their pillar three, and their socket three.

38:15 and for the other side of the court gate, on thi hand and that
hand, were hang of fifteen cubits; their pillar three, and their
socket three.

38:16 all the hang of the court round about were of fine twined
linen.

38:17 and the socket for the pillar were of brass; the hook of the
pillar and their fillet of silver; and the overlay of their
chapit of silver; and all the pillar of the court were filleted
with silver.

38:18 and the hang for the gate of the court wa needlework, of
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twine linen: and twenty
cubit wa the length, and the height in the breadth wa five cubits,
answer to the hang of the court.

38:19 and their pillar were four, and their socket of brass four;
their hook of silver, and the overlay of their chapit and their
fillet of silver.

38:20 and all the pin of the tabernacle, and of the court round
about, were of brass.

38:21 thi is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacl of
testimony, as it wa counted, accord to the command of moses,
for the servic of the levites, by the hand of ithamar, son to aaron
th priest.

38:22 and bezaleel the son uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah,
mad all that the lord command moses.

38:23 and with him wa aholiab, son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan,
an engraver, and a cun workman, and an embroider in blue, and in
purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

38:24 all the gold that wa occupi for the work in all the work of
th holi place, even the gold of the offering, wa twenti and nine
talents, and seven hundr and thirti shekels, after the shekel of the
sanctuary.

38:25 and the silver of them that were number of the congregation
wa an hundr talents, and a thousand seven hundr and threescore
and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 38:26 A bekah
for everi man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the
sanctuary, for everi one that went to be numbered, from twenti years
old and upward, for six hundr thousand and three thousand and five
hundr and fifti men.

38:27 and of the hundr talent of silver were cast the socket of
th sanctuary, and the socket of the vail; an hundr socket of the
hundr talents, a talent for a socket.

38:28 and of the thousand seven hundr seventi and five shekel he
mad hook for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted
them.

38:29 and the brass of the offer wa seventi talents, and two
thousand and four hundr shekels.

38:30 and therewith he made the socket to the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for
it, and all the vessel of the altar, 38:31 and the socket of the
court round about, and the socket of the court gate, and all the pins
of the tabernacle, and all the pin of the court round about.

39:1 and of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloth of
service, to do servic in the holi place, and made the holi garments
for aaron; as the lord command moses.

39:2 and he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fin twine linen.

39:3 and they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet,
and in the fine linen, with cun work.

39:4 they made shoulderpiec for it, to coupl it together: by the
two edg wa it coupl together.

39:5 and the curiou girdl of hi ephod, that wa upon it, wa of the
same, accord to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twine linen; as the lord command moses.

39:6 and they wrought onyx stone inclos in ouch of gold, graven,
a signet are graven, with the name of the children of israel.

39:7 and he put them on the shoulder of the ephod, that they should
b stone for a memori to the children of israel; as the lord
command moses.

39:8 and he made the breastplat of cun work, like the work of the
ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twine linen.

39:9 It wa foursquare; they made the breastplat double: a span was
th length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, be doubled.

39:10 and they set in it four row of stones: the first row wa a
sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: thi wa the first row.

39:11 and the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

39:12 and the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

39:13 and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were
inclos in ouch of gold in their inclosings.

39:14 and the stone were accord to the name of the children of
israel, twelve, accord to their names, like the engrav of a
signet, everi one with hi name, accord to the twelv tribes.

39:15 and they made upon the breastplat chain at the ends, of
wreathen work of pure gold.

39:16 and they made two ouch of gold, and two gold rings; and put
th two ring in the two end of the breastplate.

39:17 and they put the two wreathen chain of gold in the two ring on
th end of the breastplate.

39:18 and the two end of the two wreathen chain they fasten in the
two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpiec of the ephod, before
it.

39:19 and they made two ring of gold, and put them on the two end of
th breastplate, upon the border of it, which wa on the side of the
ephod inward.

39:20 and they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two
sid of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against
th other coupl thereof, abov the curiou girdl of the ephod.

39:21 and they did bind the breastplat by hi ring unto the ring of
th ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be abov the curious
girdl of the ephod, and that the breastplat might not be loos from
th ephod; as the lord command moses.

39:22 and he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.

39:23 and there wa an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of
an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not
rend.

39:24 and they made upon the hem of the robe pomegran of blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twine linen.

39:25 and they made bell of pure gold, and put the bell between the
pomegran upon the hem of the robe, round about between the
pomegranates; 39:26 A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minist in; as the
lord command moses.

39:27 and they made coat of fine linen of woven work for aaron, and
for hi sons, 39:28 and a mitr of fine linen, and goodli bonnet of
fin linen, and linen breech of fine twine linen, 39:29 and a
girdl of fine twine linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of
needlework; as the lord command moses.

39:30 and they made the plate of the holi crown of pure gold, and
wrot upon it a writing, like to the engrav of a signet, holiness
to the lord.

39:31 and they tie unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon
th mitre; as the lord command moses.

39:32 thu wa all the work of the tabernacl of the tent of the
congreg finished: and the children of israel did accord to all
that the lord command moses, so did they.

39:33 and they brought the tabernacl unto moses, the tent, and all
hi furniture, hi taches, hi boards, hi bars, and hi pillars, and
hi sockets, 39:34 and the cover of rams' skin dy red, and the
cov of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering, 39:35 the
ark of the testimony, and the stave thereof, and the merci seat,
39:36 the table, and all the vessel thereof, and the shewbread, 39:37
the pure candlestick, with the lamp thereof, even with the lamp to
b set in order, and all the vessel thereof, and the oil for light,
39:38 and the golden altar, and the anoint oil, and the sweet
incense, and the hang for the tabernacl door, 39:39 the brasen
altar, and hi grate of brass, hi staves, and all hi vessels, the
lav and hi foot, 39:40 the hang of the court, hi pillars, and
hi sockets, and the hang for the court gate, hi cords, and his
pins, and all the vessel of the servic of the tabernacle, for the
tent of the congregation, 39:41 the cloth of servic to do servic in
th holi place, and the holi garment for aaron the priest, and his
sons' garments, to minist in the priest' office.

39:42 accord to all that the lord command moses, so the children
of israel made all the work.

39:43 and mose did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done
it as the lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and moses
bless them.

40:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 40:2 On the first day of
th first month shalt thou set up the tabernacl of the tent of the
congregation.

40:3 and thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover
th ark with the vail.

40:4 and thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things
that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the
candlestick, and light the lamp thereof.

40:5 and thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incens befor the
ark of the testimony, and put the hang of the door to the
tabernacle.

40:6 and thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offer befor the
door of the tabernacl of the tent of the congregation.

40:7 and thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation
and the altar, and shalt put water therein.

40:8 and thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the
hang at the court gate.

40:9 and thou shalt take the anoint oil, and anoint the tabernacle,
and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels
thereof: and it shall be holy.

40:10 and thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all
hi vessels, and sanctifi the altar: and it shall be an altar most
holy.

40:11 and thou shalt anoint the laver and hi foot, and sanctifi it.

40:12 and thou shalt bring aaron and hi son unto the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation, and wash them with water.

40:13 and thou shalt put upon aaron the holi garments, and anoint him,
and sanctifi him; that he may minist unto me in the priest' office.

40:14 and thou shalt bring hi sons, and cloth them with coats: 40:15
and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that
they may minist unto me in the priest' office: for their anointing
shal sure be an everlast priesthood throughout their
generations.

40:16 thu did moses: accord to all that the lord command him, so
did he.

40:17 and it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on
th first day of the month, that the tabernacl wa rear up.

40:18 and mose rear up the tabernacle, and fasten hi sockets,
and set up the board thereof, and put in the bar thereof, and reared
up hi pillars.

40:19 and he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the
cov of the tent abov upon it; as the lord command moses.

40:20 and he took and put the testimoni into the ark, and set the
stav on the ark, and put the merci seat abov upon the ark: 40:21
and he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the
covering, and cover the ark of the testimony; as the lord commanded
moses.

40:22 and he put the tabl in the tent of the congregation, upon the
sid of the tabernacl northward, without the vail.

40:23 and he set the bread in order upon it befor the lord; as the
lord had command moses.

40:24 and he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over
against the table, on the side of the tabernacl southward.

40:25 and he light the lamp befor the lord; as the lord commanded
moses.

40:26 and he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation
befor the vail: 40:27 and he burnt sweet incens thereon; as the lord
command moses.

40:28 and he set up the hang at the door of the tabernacle.

40:29 and he put the altar of burnt offer by the door of the
tabernacl of the tent of the congregation, and offer upon it the
burnt offer and the meat offering; as the lord command moses.

40:30 and he set the laver between the tent of the congreg and
th altar, and put water there, to wash withal.

40:31 and mose and aaron and hi son wash their hand and their
feet thereat: 40:32 when they went into the tent of the congregation,
and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the lord
command moses.

40:33 and he rear up the court round about the tabernacl and the
altar, and set up the hang of the court gate. So mose finish the
work.

40:34 then a cloud cover the tent of the congregation, and the glory
of the lord fill the tabernacle.

40:35 and mose wa not abl to enter into the tent of the
congregation, becaus the cloud abod thereon, and the glori of the
lord fill the tabernacle.

40:36 and when the cloud wa taken up from over the tabernacle, the
children of israel went onward in all their journeys: 40:37 but if the
cloud were not taken up, then they journey not till the day that it
wa taken up.

40:38 for the cloud of the lord wa upon the tabernacl by day, and
fir wa on it by night, in the sight of all the hous of israel,
throughout all their journeys.




th third book of moses:  call leviticus


1:1 and the lord call unto moses, and spake unto him out of the
tabernacl of the congregation, saying, 1:2 speak unto the children of
israel, and say unto them, If ani man of you bring an offer unto
th lord, ye shall bring your offer of the cattle, even of the
herd, and of the flock.

1:3 If hi offer be a burnt sacrific of the herd, let him offer a
mal without blemish: he shall offer it of hi own voluntari will at
th door of the tabernacl of the congreg befor the lord.

1:4 and he shall put hi hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and
it shall be accept for him to make aton for him.

1:5 and he shall kill the bullock befor the lord: and the priests,
aaron' sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkl the blood round
about upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacl of the
congregation.

1:6 and he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into hi pieces.

1:7 and the son of aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar,
and lay the wood in order upon the fire: 1:8 and the priests, aaron's
sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the
wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 1:9 but hi inwards
and hi leg shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on
th altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offer made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the lord.

1:10 and if hi offer be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of
th goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without
blemish.

1:11 and he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before
th lord: and the priests, aaron' sons, shall sprinkl hi blood
round about upon the altar.

1:12 and he shall cut it into hi pieces, with hi head and hi fat:
and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire
which is upon the altar: 1:13 but he shall wash the inward and the
leg with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon
th altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offer made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the lord.

1:14 and if the burnt sacrific for hi offer to the lord be of
fowls, then he shall bring hi offer of turtledoves, or of young
pigeons.

1:15 and the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his
head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung
out at the side of the altar: 1:16 and he shall pluck away hi crop
with hi feathers, and cast it besid the altar on the east part, by
th place of the ashes: 1:17 and he shall cleav it with the wings
thereof, but shall not divid it asunder: and the priest shall burn it
upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt
sacrifice, an offer made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

2:1 and when ani will offer a meat offer unto the lord, his
off shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and
put frankincens thereon: 2:2 and he shall bring it to aaron' sons
th priests: and he shall take thereout hi hand of the flour
thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincens thereof;
and the priest shall burn the memori of it upon the altar, to be an
off made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord: 2:3 and the
remn of the meat offer shall be aaron' and hi sons': it is a
th most holi of the offer of the lord made by fire.

2:4 and if thou bring an oblat of a meat offer baken in the
oven, it shall be unleaven cake of fine flour mingl with oil, or
unleaven wafer anoint with oil.

2:5 and if thi oblat be a meat offer baken in a pan, it shall be
of fine flour unleavened, mingl with oil.

2:6 thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat
offering.

2:7 and if thi oblat be a meat offer baken in the fryingpan, it
shal be made of fine flour with oil.

2:8 and thou shalt bring the meat offer that is made of these
th unto the lord: and when it is present unto the priest, he
shal bring it unto the altar.

2:9 and the priest shall take from the meat offer a memorial
thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offer made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

2:10 and that which is left of the meat offer shall be aaron' and
hi sons': it is a thing most holi of the offer of the lord made
bi fire.

2:11 No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the lord, shall be
mad with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor ani honey, in any
off of the lord made by fire.

2:12 As for the oblat of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto
th lord: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.

2:13 and everi oblat of thi meat offer shalt thou season with
salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the coven of thi god to
b lack from thi meat offering: with all thine offer thou shalt
off salt.

2:14 and if thou offer a meat offer of thi firstfruit unto the
lord, thou shalt offer for the meat offer of thi firstfruit green
ear of corn dri by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears.

2:15 and thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincens thereon: it
i a meat offering.

2:16 and the priest shall burn the memori of it, part of the beaten
corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense
thereof: it is an offer made by fire unto the lord.

3:1 and if hi oblat be a sacrific of peac offering, if he offer
it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it
without blemish befor the lord.

3:2 and he shall lay hi hand upon the head of hi offering, and kill
it at the door of the tabernacl of the congregation: and aaron' sons
th priest shall sprinkl the blood upon the altar round about.

3:3 and he shall offer of the sacrific of the peac offer an
off made by fire unto the lord; the fat that covereth the
inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:4 and the two
kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the
caul abov the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:5 and aaron' son shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt
sacrifice, which is upon the wood that is on the fire: it is an
off made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

3:6 and if hi offer for a sacrific of peac offer unto the
lord be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without
blemish.

3:7 If he offer a lamb for hi offering, then shall he offer it before
th lord.

3:8 and he shall lay hi hand upon the head of hi offering, and kill
it befor the tabernacl of the congregation: and aaron' son shall
sprinkl the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

3:9 and he shall offer of the sacrific of the peac offer an
off made by fire unto the lord; the fat thereof, and the whole
rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that
covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:10
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the
flanks, and the caul abov the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
tak away.

3:11 and the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of
th offer made by fire unto the lord.

3:12 and if hi offer be a goat, then he shall offer it befor the
lord.

3:13 and he shall lay hi hand upon the head of it, and kill it before
th tabernacl of the congregation: and the son of aaron shall
sprinkl the blood thereof upon the altar round about.

3:14 and he shall offer thereof hi offering, even an offer made by
fir unto the lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat
that is upon the inwards, 3:15 and the two kidneys, and the fat that
i upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul abov the liver,
with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:16 and the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of
th offer made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the
lord's.

3:17 It shall be a perpetu statut for your gener throughout
al your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.

4:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:2 speak unto the children
of israel, saying, If a soul shall sin through ignor against any
of the command of the lord concern thing which ought not to
b done, and shall do against ani of them: 4:3 If the priest that is
anoint do sin accord to the sin of the people; then let him bring
for hi sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish
unto the lord for a sin offering.

4:4 and he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacl of
th congreg befor the lord; and shall lay hi hand upon the
bullock' head, and kill the bullock befor the lord.

4:5 and the priest that is anoint shall take of the bullock' blood,
and bring it to the tabernacl of the congregation: 4:6 and the priest
shal dip hi finger in the blood, and sprinkl of the blood seven
tim befor the lord, befor the vail of the sanctuary.

4:7 and the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horn of the
altar of sweet incens befor the lord, which is in the tabernacl of
th congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the
bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation.

4:8 and he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the
sin offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that
i upon the inwards, 4:9 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon
them, which is by the flanks, and the caul abov the liver, with the
kidneys, it shall he take away, 4:10 As it wa taken off from the
bullock of the sacrific of peac offerings: and the priest shall burn
them upon the altar of the burnt offering.

4:11 and the skin of the bullock, and all hi flesh, with hi head,
and with hi legs, and hi inwards, and hi dung, 4:12 even the whole
bullock shall he carri forth without the camp unto a clean place,
wher the ash are pour out, and burn him on the wood with fire:
wher the ash are pour out shall he be burnt.

4:13 and if the whole congreg of israel sin through ignorance,
and the thing be hid from the eye of the assembly, and they have done
somewhat against ani of the command of the lord concern things
which should not be done, and are guilty; 4:14 when the sin, which
they have sin against it, is known, then the congreg shall
off a young bullock for the sin, and bring him befor the tabernacle
of the congregation.

4:15 and the elder of the congreg shall lay their hand upon the
head of the bullock befor the lord: and the bullock shall be killed
befor the lord.

4:16 and the priest that is anoint shall bring of the bullock's
blood to the tabernacl of the congregation: 4:17 and the priest shall
dip hi finger in some of the blood, and sprinkl it seven times
befor the lord, even befor the vail.

4:18 and he shall put some of the blood upon the horn of the altar
which is befor the lord, that is in the tabernacl of the
congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the
altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacl of
th congregation.

4:19 and he shall take all hi fat from him, and burn it upon the
altar.

4:20 and he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a
sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an
aton for them, and it shall be forgiven them.

4:21 and he shall carri forth the bullock without the camp, and burn
him as he burn the first bullock: it is a sin offer for the
congregation.

4:22 when a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance
against ani of the command of the lord hi god concern things
which should not be done, and is guilty; 4:23 Or if hi sin, wherein
h hath sinned, come to hi knowledge; he shall bring hi offering, a
kid of the goats, a male without blemish: 4:24 and he shall lay his
hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they
kil the burnt offer befor the lord: it is a sin offering.

4:25 and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offer with
hi finger, and put it upon the horn of the altar of burnt offering,
and shall pour out hi blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt
offering.

4:26 and he shall burn all hi fat upon the altar, as the fat of the
sacrific of peac offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement
for him as concern hi sin, and it shall be forgiven him.

4:27 and if ani one of the common peopl sin through ignorance, while
h doeth somewhat against ani of the command of the lord
concern thing which ought not to be done, and be guilty; 4:28 or
if hi sin, which he hath sinned, come to hi knowledge: then he shall
br hi offering, a kid of the goats, a femal without blemish, for
hi sin which he hath sinned.

4:29 and he shall lay hi hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
slay the sin offer in the place of the burnt offering.

4:30 and the priest shall take of the blood thereof with hi finger,
and put it upon the horn of the altar of burnt offering, and shall
pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar.

4:31 and he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken
away from off the sacrific of peac offerings; and the priest shall
burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the lord; and the
priest shall make an aton for him, and it shall be forgiven him.

4:32 and if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a
femal without blemish.

4:33 and he shall lay hi hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
slay it for a sin offer in the place where they kill the burnt
offering.

4:34 and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offer with
hi finger, and put it upon the horn of the altar of burnt offering,
and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar:
4:35 and he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the
lamb is taken away from the sacrific of the peac offerings; and the
priest shall burn them upon the altar, accord to the offer made
bi fire unto the lord: and the priest shall make an aton for his
sin that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:1 and if a soul sin, and hear the voic of swearing, and is a
witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it,
then he shall bear hi iniquity.

5:2 Or if a soul touch ani unclean thing, whether it be a carcas of
an unclean beast, or a carcas of unclean cattle, or the carcas of
unclean creep things, and if it be hidden from him; he also shall
b unclean, and guilty.

5:3 Or if he touch the unclean of man, whatsoev unclean it
b that a man shall be defil withal, and it be hid from him; when he
knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty.

5:4 Or if a soul swear, pronounc with hi lip to do evil, or to do
good, whatsoev it be that a man shall pronounc with an oath, and it
b hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilti in one
of these.

5:5 and it shall be, when he shall be guilti in one of these things,
that he shall confess that he hath sin in that thing: 5:6 and he
shal bring hi trespass offer unto the lord for hi sin which he
hath sinned, a femal from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats,
for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an aton for him
concern hi sin.

5:7 and if he be not abl to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his
trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, unto the lord; one for a sin offering, and the other for a
burnt offering.

5:8 and he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that
which is for the sin offer first, and wring off hi head from his
neck, but shall not divid it asunder: 5:9 and he shall sprinkl of
th blood of the sin offer upon the side of the altar; and the rest
of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it is a
sin offering.

5:10 and he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, accord to
th manner: and the priest shall make an aton for him for hi sin
which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:11 but if he be not abl to bring two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, then he that sin shall bring for hi offer the tenth
part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil
upon it, neither shall he put ani frankincens thereon: for it is a
sin offering.

5:12 then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take
hi hand of it, even a memori thereof, and burn it on the altar,
accord to the offer made by fire unto the lord: it is a sin
offering.

5:13 and the priest shall make an aton for him as touch his
sin that he hath sin in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him:
and the remnant shall be the priest's, as a meat offering.

5:14 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:15 If a soul commit a
trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holi thing of the lord;
then he shall bring for hi trespass unto the lord a ram without
blemish out of the flocks, with thi estim by shekel of silver,
aft the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering.

5:16 and he shall make amend for the harm that he hath done in the
holi thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the
priest: and the priest shall make an aton for him with the ram of
th trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:17 and if a soul sin, and commit ani of these thing which are
forbidden to be done by the command of the lord; though he wist
it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear hi iniquity.

5:18 and he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with
thi estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the
priest shall make an aton for him concern hi ignorance
wherein he er and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:19 It is a trespass offering: he hath certainli trespass against
th lord.

6:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:2 If a soul sin, and
commit a trespass against the lord, and lie unto hi neighbour in that
which wa deliv him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken
away by violence, or hath deceiv hi neighbour; 6:3 Or have found
that which wa lost, and lieth concern it, and sweareth falsely; in
ani of all these that a man doeth, sin therein: 6:4 then it shall
be, becaus he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restor that
which he took violent away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully
gotten, or that which wa deliv him to keep, or the lost thing
which he found, 6:5 Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he
shal even restor it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part
mor thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day
of hi trespass offering.

6:6 and he shall bring hi trespass offer unto the lord, a ram
without blemish out of the flock, with thi estimation, for a trespass
offering, unto the priest: 6:7 and the priest shall make an atonement
for him befor the lord: and it shall be forgiven him for ani thing of
al that he hath done in trespass therein.

6:8 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:9 command aaron and his
sons, saying, thi is the law of the burnt offering: It is the burnt
offering, becaus of the burn upon the altar all night unto the
morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burn in it.

6:10 and the priest shall put on hi linen garment, and hi linen
breech shall he put upon hi flesh, and take up the ash which the
fir hath consum with the burnt offer on the altar, and he shall
put them besid the altar.

6:11 and he shall put off hi garments, and put on other garments, and
carri forth the ash without the camp unto a clean place.

6:12 and the fire upon the altar shall be burn in it; it shall not
b put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it everi morning, and
lay the burnt offer in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the
fat of the peac offerings.

6:13 the fire shall ever be burn upon the altar; it shall never go
out.

6:14 and thi is the law of the meat offering: the son of aaron shall
off it befor the lord, befor the altar.

6:15 and he shall take of it hi handful, of the flour of the meat
offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincens which is
upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet
savour, even the memori of it, unto the lord.

6:16 and the remaind thereof shall aaron and hi son eat: with
unleaven bread shall it be eaten in the holi place; in the court of
th tabernacl of the congreg they shall eat it.

6:17 It shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them for
their portion of my offer made by fire; it is most holy, as is the
sin offering, and as the trespass offering.

6:18 all the male among the children of aaron shall eat of it. it
shal be a statut for ever in your gener concern the
off of the lord made by fire: everi one that toucheth them shall
b holy.

6:19 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:20 thi is the offering
of aaron and of hi sons, which they shall offer unto the lord in the
day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for
a meat offer perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof
at night.

6:21 In a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou
shalt bring it in: and the baken piec of the meat offer shalt
thou offer for a sweet savour unto the lord.

6:22 and the priest of hi son that is anoint in hi stead shall
off it: it is a statut for ever unto the lord; it shall be wholly
burnt.

6:23 for everi meat offer for the priest shall be wholli burnt: it
shal not be eaten.

6:24 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:25 speak unto aaron and
to hi sons, saying, thi is the law of the sin offering: In the place
wher the burnt offer is kill shall the sin offer be killed
befor the lord: it is most holy.

6:26 the priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy
plac shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacl of the
congregation.

6:27 whatsoev shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when
ther is sprinkl of the blood thereof upon ani garment, thou shalt
wash that whereon it wa sprinkl in the holi place.

6:28 but the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and
if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed
in water.

6:29 all the male among the priest shall eat thereof: it is most
holy.

6:30 and no sin offering, whereof ani of the blood is brought into the
tabernacl of the congreg to reconcil withal in the holi place,
shal be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.

7:1 likewis thi is the law of the trespass offering: it is most
holy.

7:2 In the place where they kill the burnt offer shall they kill
th trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkl round
about upon the altar.

7:3 and he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the
fat that covereth the inwards, 7:4 and the two kidneys, and the fat
that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above
th liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away: 7:5 and the priest
shal burn them upon the altar for an offer made by fire unto the
lord: it is a trespass offering.

7:6 everi male among the priest shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten
in the holi place: it is most holy.

7:7 As the sin offer is, so is the trespass offering: there is one
law for them: the priest that maketh aton therewith shall have
it.

7:8 and the priest that offereth ani man' burnt offering, even the
priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offer which he
hath offered.

7:9 and all the meat offer that is baken in the oven, and all that
i dress in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest's
that offereth it.

7:10 and everi meat offering, mingl with oil, and dry, shall all the
son of aaron have, one as much as another.

7:11 and thi is the law of the sacrific of peac offerings, which he
shal offer unto the lord.

7:12 If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the
sacrific of thanksgiv unleaven cake mingl with oil, and
unleaven wafer anoint with oil, and cake mingl with oil, of
fin flour, fried.

7:13 besid the cakes, he shall offer for hi offer leaven bread
with the sacrific of thanksgiv of hi peac offerings.

7:14 and of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblat for an
heav offer unto the lord, and it shall be the priest' that
sprinkleth the blood of the peac offerings.

7:15 and the flesh of the sacrific of hi peac offer for
thanksgiv shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall
not leav ani of it until the morning.

7:16 but if the sacrific of hi offer be a vow, or a voluntary
offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his
sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remaind of it shall be eaten:
7:17 but the remaind of the flesh of the sacrific on the third day
shal be burnt with fire.

7:18 and if ani of the flesh of the sacrific of hi peac offerings
b eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither
shal it be imput unto him that offereth it: it shall be an
abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear hi iniquity.

7:19 and the flesh that toucheth ani unclean thing shall not be eaten;
it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean
shal eat thereof.

7:20 but the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrific of peace
offerings, that pertain unto the lord, have hi unclean upon
him, even that soul shall be cut off from hi people.

7:21 moreov the soul that shall touch ani unclean thing, as the
unclean of man, or ani unclean beast, or ani abomin unclean
thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrific of peac offerings, which
pertain unto the lord, even that soul shall be cut off from his
people.

7:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:23 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or
of sheep, or of goat.

7:24 and the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of
that which is torn with beasts, may be use in ani other use: but ye
shal in no wise eat of it.

7:25 for whosoev eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an
off made by fire unto the lord, even the soul that eateth it
shal be cut off from hi people.

7:26 moreov ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl
or of beast, in ani of your dwellings.

7:27 whatsoev soul it be that eateth ani manner of blood, even that
soul shall be cut off from hi people.

7:28 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:29 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, He that offereth the sacrific of his
peac offer unto the lord shall bring hi oblat unto the lord
of the sacrific of hi peac offerings.

7:30 hi own hand shall bring the offer of the lord made by fire,
th fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be
wav for a wave offer befor the lord.

7:31 and the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast
shal be aaron' and hi sons'.

7:32 and the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave
off of the sacrific of your peac offerings.

7:33 He among the son of aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace
offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for hi part.

7:34 for the wave breast and the heav shoulder have I taken of the
children of israel from off the sacrific of their peac offerings,
and have given them unto aaron the priest and unto hi son by a
statut for ever from among the children of israel.

7:35 thi is the portion of the anoint of aaron, and of the
anoint of hi sons, out of the offer of the lord made by fire,
in the day when he present them to minist unto the lord in the
priest' office; 7:36 which the lord command to be given them of the
children of israel, in the day that he anoint them, by a statut for
ev throughout their generations.

7:37 thi is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and
of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the
consecrations, and of the sacrific of the peac offerings; 7:38 which
th lord command mose in mount sinai, in the day that he commanded
th children of israel to offer their oblat unto the lord, in the
wild of sinai.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 take aaron and hi sons
with him, and the garments, and the anoint oil, and a bullock for
th sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleaven bread; 8:3
and gather thou all the congreg togeth unto the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation.

8:4 and mose did as the lord command him; and the assembl was
gath togeth unto the door of the tabernacl of the congregation.

8:5 and mose said unto the congregation, thi is the thing which the
lord command to be done.

8:6 and mose brought aaron and hi sons, and wash them with water.

8:7 and he put upon him the coat, and gird him with the girdle, and
cloth him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded
him with the curiou girdl of the ephod, and bound it unto him
therewith.

8:8 and he put the breastplat upon him: also he put in the
breastpl the urim and the thummim.

8:9 and he put the mitr upon hi head; also upon the mitre, even upon
hi forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holi crown; as the
lord command moses.

8:10 and mose took the anoint oil, and anoint the tabernacl and
al that wa therein, and sanctifi them.

8:11 and he sprinkl thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed
th altar and all hi vessels, both the laver and hi foot, to
sanctifi them.

8:12 and he pour of the anoint oil upon aaron' head, and
anoint him, to sanctifi him.

8:13 and mose brought aaron' sons, and put coat upon them, and
gird them with girdles, and put bonnet upon them; as the lord
command moses.

8:14 and he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and aaron and
hi son laid their hand upon the head of the bullock for the sin
offering.

8:15 and he slew it; and mose took the blood, and put it upon the
horn of the altar round about with hi finger, and purifi the
altar, and pour the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified
it, to make reconcili upon it.

8:16 and he took all the fat that wa upon the inwards, and the caul
abov the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and mose burned
it upon the altar.

8:17 but the bullock, and hi hide, hi flesh, and hi dung, he burnt
with fire without the camp; as the lord command moses.

8:18 and he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and aaron and his
son laid their hand upon the head of the ram.

8:19 and he kill it; and mose sprinkl the blood upon the altar
round about.

8:20 and he cut the ram into pieces; and mose burnt the head, and the
pieces, and the fat.

8:21 and he wash the inward and the leg in water; and mose burnt
th whole ram upon the altar: it wa a burnt sacrific for a sweet
savour, and an offer made by fire unto the lord; as the lord
command moses.

8:22 and he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and aaron
and hi son laid their hand upon the head of the ram.

8:23 and he slew it; and mose took of the blood of it, and put it
upon the tip of aaron' right ear, and upon the thumb of hi right
hand, and upon the great toe of hi right foot.

8:24 and he brought aaron' sons, and mose put of the blood upon the
tip of their right ear, and upon the thumb of their right hands, and
upon the great toe of their right feet: and mose sprinkl the blood
upon the altar round about.

8:25 and he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that wa upon
th inwards, and the caul abov the liver, and the two kidneys, and
their fat, and the right shoulder: 8:26 and out of the basket of
unleaven bread, that wa befor the lord, he took one unleavened
cake, and a cake of oil bread, and one wafer, and put them on the
fat, and upon the right shoulder: 8:27 and he put all upon aaron's
hands, and upon hi sons' hands, and wave them for a wave offering
befor the lord.

8:28 and mose took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the
altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecr for a sweet
savour: it is an offer made by fire unto the lord.

8:29 and mose took the breast, and wave it for a wave offering
befor the lord: for of the ram of consecr it wa moses' part; as
th lord command moses.

8:30 and mose took of the anoint oil, and of the blood which was
upon the altar, and sprinkl it upon aaron, and upon hi garments,
and upon hi sons, and upon hi sons' garment with him; and
sanctifi aaron, and hi garments, and hi sons, and hi sons'
gar with him.

8:31 and mose said unto aaron and to hi sons, boil the flesh at the
door of the tabernacl of the congregation: and there eat it with the
bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I commanded, saying,
aaron and hi son shall eat it.

8:32 and that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye
burn with fire.

8:33 and ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacl of the
congreg in seven days, until the day of your consecr be at
an end: for seven day shall he consecr you.

8:34 As he hath done thi day, so the lord hath command to do, to
mak an aton for you.

8:35 therefor shall ye abid at the door of the tabernacl of the
congreg day and night seven days, and keep the charg of the
lord, that ye die not: for so I am commanded.

8:36 So aaron and hi son did all thing which the lord command by
th hand of moses.

9:1 and it came to pass on the eighth day, that mose call aaron and
hi sons, and the elder of israel; 9:2 and he said unto aaron, take
the a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering,
without blemish, and offer them befor the lord.

9:3 and unto the children of israel thou shalt speak, saying, take ye
a kid of the goat for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of
th first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering; 9:4 also a
bullock and a ram for peac offerings, to sacrific befor the lord;
and a meat offer mingl with oil: for to day the lord will appear
unto you.

9:5 and they brought that which mose command befor the tabernacle
of the congregation: and all the congreg drew near and stood
befor the lord.

9:6 and mose said, thi is the thing which the lord command that ye
should do: and the glori of the lord shall appear unto you.

9:7 and mose said unto aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thi sin
offering, and thi burnt offering, and make an aton for thyself,
and for the people: and offer the offer of the people, and make an
aton for them; as the lord commanded.

9:8 aaron therefor went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin
offering, which wa for himself.

9:9 and the son of aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped
hi finger in the blood, and put it upon the horn of the altar, and
pour out the blood at the bottom of the altar: 9:10 but the fat, and
th kidneys, and the caul abov the liver of the sin offering, he
burnt upon the altar; as the lord command moses.

9:11 and the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.

9:12 and he slew the burnt offering; and aaron' son present unto
him the blood, which he sprinkl round about upon the altar.

9:13 and they present the burnt offer unto him, with the pieces
thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.

9:14 and he did wash the inward and the legs, and burnt them upon the
burnt offer on the altar.

9:15 and he brought the people' offering, and took the goat, which
wa the sin offer for the people, and slew it, and offer it for
sin, as the first.

9:16 and he brought the burnt offering, and offer it accord to
th manner.

9:17 and he brought the meat offering, and took an hand thereof,
and burnt it upon the altar, besid the burnt sacrific of the
morning.

9:18 He slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrific of peace
offerings, which wa for the people: and aaron' son present unto
him the blood, which he sprinkl upon the altar round about, 9:19 and
th fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which
covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul abov the liver:
9:20 and they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon
th altar: 9:21 and the breast and the right shoulder aaron wave for
a wave offer befor the lord; as mose commanded.

9:22 and aaron lift up hi hand toward the people, and bless them,
and came down from offer of the sin offering, and the burnt
offering, and peac offerings.

9:23 and mose and aaron went into the tabernacl of the congregation,
and came out, and bless the people: and the glori of the lord
appear unto all the people.

9:24 and there came a fire out from befor the lord, and consum upon
th altar the burnt offer and the fat: which when all the people
saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.

10:1 and nadab and abihu, the son of aaron, took either of them his
censer, and put fire therein, and put incens thereon, and offered
strang fire befor the lord, which he command them not.

10:2 and there went out fire from the lord, and devour them, and
they die befor the lord.

10:3 then mose said unto aaron, thi is it that the lord spake,
saying, I will be sanctifi in them that come nigh me, and befor all
th peopl I will be glorified. and aaron held hi peace.

10:4 and mose call mishael and elzaphan, the son of uzziel the
uncl of aaron, and said unto them, come near, carri your brethren
from befor the sanctuari out of the camp.

10:5 So they went near, and carri them in their coat out of the
camp; as mose had said.

10:6 and mose said unto aaron, and unto eleazar and unto ithamar, his
sons, uncov not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die,
and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the
whol hous of israel, bewail the burn which the lord hath kindled.

10:7 and ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacl of the
congregation, lest ye die: for the anoint oil of the lord is upon
you. and they did accord to the word of moses.

10:8 and the lord spake unto aaron, saying, 10:9 Do not drink wine nor
strong drink, thou, nor thi son with thee, when ye go into the
tabernacl of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statut for
ev throughout your generations: 10:10 and that ye may put difference
between holi and unholy, and between unclean and clean; 10:11 and that
y may teach the children of israel all the statut which the lord
hath spoken unto them by the hand of moses.

10:12 and mose spake unto aaron, and unto eleazar and unto ithamar,
hi son that were left, take the meat offer that remaineth of the
off of the lord made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside
th altar: for it is most holy: 10:13 and ye shall eat it in the holy
place, becaus it is thi due, and thi sons' due, of the sacrific of
th lord made by fire: for so I am commanded.

10:14 and the wave breast and heav shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place; thou, and thi sons, and thi daughter with thee: for they be
thi due, and thi sons' due, which are given out of the sacrific of
peac offer of the children of israel.

10:15 the heav shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the
off made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering
befor the lord; and it shall be thine, and thi sons' with thee, by a
statut for ever; as the lord hath commanded.

10:16 and mose dilig sought the goat of the sin offering, and,
behold, it wa burnt: and he wa angri with eleazar and ithamar, the
son of aaron which were left alive, saying, 10:17 wherefor have ye
not eaten the sin offer in the holi place, see it is most holy,
and god hath given it you to bear the iniqu of the congregation, to
mak aton for them befor the lord?  10:18 behold, the blood of
it wa not brought in within the holi place: ye should inde have
eaten it in the holi place, as I commanded.

10:19 and aaron said unto moses, behold, thi day have they offered
their sin offer and their burnt offer befor the lord; and such
th have befallen me: and if I had eaten the sin offer to day,
should it have been accept in the sight of the lord?  10:20 and when
mos heard that, he wa content.

11:1 and the lord spake unto mose and to aaron, say unto them,
11:2 speak unto the children of israel, saying, these are the beasts
which ye shall eat among all the beast that are on the earth.

11:3 whatsoev parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the
cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.

11:4 nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divid the hoof: as the camel, becaus he cheweth the
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:5 and the coney, becaus he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:6 and the hare, becaus he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:7 and the swine, though he divid the hoof, and be clovenfooted,
yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you.

11:8 Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcas shall ye not
touch; they are unclean to you.

11:9 these shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatsoev hath
fin and scale in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them
shal ye eat.

11:10 and all that have not fin and scale in the seas, and in the
rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of ani live thing which
i in the waters, they shall be an abomin unto you: 11:11 they
shal be even an abomin unto you; ye shall not eat of their
flesh, but ye shall have their carcas in abomination.

11:12 whatsoev hath no fin nor scale in the waters, that shall be
an abomin unto you.

11:13 and these are they which ye shall have in abomin among the
fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle,
and the ossifrage, and the ospray, 11:14 and the vulture, and the kite
aft hi kind; 11:15 everi raven after hi kind; 11:16 and the owl,
and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after hi kind, 11:17
and the littl owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl, 11:18 and
th swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle, 11:19 and the stork,
th heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

11:20 all fowl that creep, go upon all four, shall be an
abomin unto you.

11:21 yet these may ye eat of everi fli creep thing that goeth
upon all four, which have leg abov their feet, to leap withal upon
th earth; 11:22 even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his
kind, and the bald locust after hi kind, and the beetl after his
kind, and the grasshopp after hi kind.

11:23 but all other fli creep things, which have four feet,
shal be an abomin unto you.

11:24 and for these ye shall be unclean: whosoev toucheth the
carcas of them shall be unclean until the even.

11:25 and whosoev beareth ought of the carcas of them shall wash
hi clothes, and be unclean until the even.

11:26 the carcas of everi beast which divideth the hoof, and is not
clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: everi one
that toucheth them shall be unclean.

11:27 and whatsoev goeth upon hi paws, among all manner of beasts
that go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their
carcas shall be unclean until the even.

11:28 and he that beareth the carcas of them shall wash hi clothes,
and be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you.

11:29 these also shall be unclean unto you among the creep things
that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise
aft hi kind, 11:30 and the ferret, and the chameleon, and the
lizard, and the snail, and the mole.

11:31 these are unclean to you among all that creep: whosoev doth
touch them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even.

11:32 and upon whatsoev ani of them, when they are dead, doth fall,
it shall be unclean; whether it be ani vessel of wood, or raiment, or
skin, or sack, whatsoev vessel it be, wherein ani work is done, it
must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it
shal be cleansed.

11:33 and everi earthen vessel, whereinto ani of them falleth,
whatsoev is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it.

11:34 Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh
shal be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in everi such vessel
shal be unclean.

11:35 and everi thing whereupon ani part of their carcas falleth
shal be unclean; whether it be oven, or rang for pots, they shall
b broken down: for they are unclean and shall be unclean unto you.

11:36 nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenti of
water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcas shall be
unclean.

11:37 and if ani part of their carcas fall upon ani sow seed which
i to be sown, it shall be clean.

11:38 but if ani water be put upon the seed, and ani part of their
carcas fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you.

11:39 and if ani beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the
carcas thereof shall be unclean until the even.

11:40 and he that eateth of the carcas of it shall wash hi clothes,
and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcas of it
shal wash hi clothes, and be unclean until the even.

11:41 and everi creep thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be
an abomination; it shall not be eaten.

11:42 whatsoev goeth upon the belly, and whatsoev goeth upon all
four, or whatsoev hath more feet among all creep thing that
creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an
abomination.

11:43 Ye shall not make yourselv abomin with ani creep thing
that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselv unclean with them,
that ye should be defil thereby.

11:44 for I am the lord your god: ye shall therefor sanctify
yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy: neither shall ye
defil yourselv with ani manner of creep thing that creepeth upon
th earth.

11:45 for I am the lord that bringeth you up out of the land of egypt,
to be your god: ye shall therefor be holy, for I am holy.

11:46 thi is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every
liv creatur that moveth in the waters, and of everi creatur that
creepeth upon the earth: 11:47 To make a differ between the
unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the
beast that may not be eaten.

12:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 12:2 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, If a woman have conceiv seed, and born a
man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; accord to the days
of the separ for her infirm shall she be unclean.

12:3 and in the eighth day the flesh of hi foreskin shall be
circumcised.

12:4 and she shall then continu in the blood of her purifi three
and thirti days; she shall touch no hallow thing, nor come into the
sanctuary, until the day of her purifi be fulfilled.

12:5 but if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two
weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continu in the blood of
her purifi threescor and six days.

12:6 and when the day of her purifi are fulfilled, for a son, or
for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt
offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering,
unto the door of the tabernacl of the congregation, unto the priest:
12:7 who shall offer it befor the lord, and make an aton for
her; and she shall be cleans from the issu of her blood. thi is
th law for her that hath born a male or a female.

12:8 and if she be not abl to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the
oth for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an aton for
her, and she shall be clean.

13:1 and the lord spake unto mose and aaron, saying, 13:2 when a man
shal have in the skin of hi flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot,
and it be in the skin of hi flesh like the plagu of leprosy; then he
shal be brought unto aaron the priest, or unto one of hi son the
priests: 13:3 and the priest shall look on the plagu in the skin of
th flesh: and when the hair in the plagu is turn white, and the
plagu in sight be deeper than the skin of hi flesh, it is a plague
of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounc him
unclean.

13:4 If the bright spot be white in the skin of hi flesh, and in
sight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned
white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plagu seven
days: 13:5 and the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plagu in hi sight be at a stay, and the plagu spread
not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven day more:
13:6 and the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plagu be somewhat dark, and the plagu spread not in
th skin, the priest shall pronounc him clean: it is but a scab: and
h shall wash hi clothes, and be clean.

13:7 but if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he
hath been seen of the priest for hi cleansing, he shall be seen of
th priest again.

13:8 and if the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the
skin, then the priest shall pronounc him unclean: it is a leprosy.

13:9 when the plagu of leprosi is in a man, then he shall be brought
unto the priest; 13:10 and the priest shall see him: and, behold, if
th rise be white in the skin, and it have turn the hair white,
and there be quick raw flesh in the rising; 13:11 It is an old leprosy
in the skin of hi flesh, and the priest shall pronounc him unclean,
and shall not shut him up: for he is unclean.

13:12 and if a leprosi break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy
cov all the skin of him that hath the plagu from hi head even to
hi foot, wheresoev the priest looketh; 13:13 then the priest shall
consider: and, behold, if the leprosi have cover all hi flesh, he
shal pronounc him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned
white: he is clean.

13:14 but when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.

13:15 and the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounc him to be
unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy.

13:16 Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be chang unto white, he
shal come unto the priest; 13:17 and the priest shall see him: and,
behold, if the plagu be turn into white; then the priest shall
pronounc him clean that hath the plague: he is clean.

13:18 the flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, wa a boil,
and is healed, 13:19 and in the place of the boil there be a white
rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be
shew to the priest; 13:20 and if, when the priest seeth it, behold,
it be in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned
white; the priest shall pronounc him unclean: it is a plagu of
leprosi broken out of the boil.

13:21 but if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hair therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat
dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:22 and if it
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounc him
unclean: it is a plague.

13:23 but if the bright spot stay in hi place, and spread not, it is
a burn boil; and the priest shall pronounc him clean.

13:24 Or if there be ani flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot
burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot,
somewhat reddish, or white; 13:25 then the priest shall look upon it:
and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turn white, and it be
in sight deeper than the skin; it is a leprosi broken out of the
burning: wherefor the priest shall pronounc him unclean: it is the
plagu of leprosy.

13:26 but if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but
b somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:27
and the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounc him
unclean: it is the plagu of leprosy.

13:28 and if the bright spot stay in hi place, and spread not in the
skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rise of the burning, and the
priest shall pronounc him clean: for it is an inflamm of the
burning.

13:29 If a man or woman have a plagu upon the head or the beard;
13:30 then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it be in
sight deeper than the skin; and there be in it a yellow thin hair;
then the priest shall pronounc him unclean: it is a dri scall, even a
leprosi upon the head or beard.

13:31 and if the priest look on the plagu of the scall, and, behold,
it be not in sight deeper than the skin, and that there is no black
hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plagu of
th scall seven days: 13:32 and in the seventh day the priest shall
look on the plague: and, behold, if the scall spread not, and there be
in it no yellow hair, and the scall be not in sight deeper than the
skin; 13:33 He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and
th priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven day more:
13:34 and in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and,
behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight deeper
than the skin; then the priest shall pronounc him clean: and he shall
wash hi clothes, and be clean.

13:35 but if the scall spread much in the skin after hi cleansing;
13:36 then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be
spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he is
unclean.

13:37 but if the scall be in hi sight at a stay, and that there is
black hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the
priest shall pronounc him clean.

13:38 If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright
spots, even white bright spots; 13:39 then the priest shall look: and,
behold, if the bright spot in the skin of their flesh be darkish
white; it is a freckl spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.

13:40 and the man whose hair is fallen off hi head, he is bald; yet
i he clean.

13:41 and he that hath hi hair fallen off from the part of hi head
toward hi face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean.

13:42 and if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white
reddish sore; it is a leprosi sprung up in hi bald head, or hi bald
forehead.

13:43 then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the rising
of the sore be white reddish in hi bald head, or in hi bald
forehead, as the leprosi appeareth in the skin of the flesh; 13:44 he
i a leprou man, he is unclean: the priest shall pronounc him
utterli unclean; hi plagu is in hi head.

13:45 and the leper in whom the plagu is, hi cloth shall be rent,
and hi head bare, and he shall put a cover upon hi upper lip, and
shal cry, unclean, unclean.

13:46 all the day wherein the plagu shall be in him he shall be
defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall
hi habit be.

13:47 the garment also that the plagu of leprosi is in, whether it be
a woollen garment, or a linen garment; 13:48 whether it be in the
warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any
th made of skin; 13:49 and if the plagu be greenish or reddish in
th garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in
ani thing of skin; it is a plagu of leprosy, and shall be shew unto
th priest: 13:50 and the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut
up it that hath the plagu seven days: 13:51 and he shall look on the
plagu on the seventh day: if the plagu be spread in the garment,
eith in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, or in ani work that
i made of skin; the plagu is a fret leprosy; it is unclean.

13:52 He shall therefor burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in
woollen or in linen, or ani thing of skin, wherein the plagu is: for
it is a fret leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire.

13:53 and if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plagu be not
spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any
th of skin; 13:54 then the priest shall command that they wash the
th wherein the plagu is, and he shall shut it up seven day more:
13:55 and the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is
washed: and, behold, if the plagu have not chang hi colour, and
th plagu be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the
fire; it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.

13:56 and if the priest look, and, behold, the plagu be somewhat dark
aft the wash of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or
out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof: 13:57 and if
it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or
in ani thing of skin; it is a spread plague: thou shalt burn that
wherein the plagu is with fire.

13:58 and the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoev thing of
skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plagu be depart from
them, then it shall be wash the second time, and shall be clean.

13:59 thi is the law of the plagu of leprosi in a garment of woollen
or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or ani thing of skins, to
pronounc it clean, or to pronounc it unclean.

14:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 14:2 thi shall be the law
of the leper in the day of hi cleansing: He shall be brought unto the
priest: 14:3 and the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the
priest shall look, and, behold, if the plagu of leprosi be heal in
th leper; 14:4 then shall the priest command to take for him that is
to be cleans two bird aliv and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet,
and hyssop: 14:5 and the priest shall command that one of the bird be
kil in an earthen vessel over run water: 14:6 As for the living
bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the
hyssop, and shall dip them and the live bird in the blood of the
bird that wa kill over the run water: 14:7 and he shall
sprinkl upon him that is to be cleans from the leprosi seven times,
and shall pronounc him clean, and shall let the live bird loose
into the open field.

14:8 and he that is to be cleans shall wash hi clothes, and shave
off all hi hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and
aft that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarri abroad out of
hi tent seven days.

14:9 but it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his
hair off hi head and hi beard and hi eyebrows, even all hi hair he
shal shave off: and he shall wash hi clothes, also he shall wash his
flesh in water, and he shall be clean.

14:10 and on the eighth day he shall take two he lamb without
blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three
tenth deal of fine flour for a meat offering, mingl with oil, and
on log of oil.

14:11 and the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that
i to be made clean, and those things, befor the lord, at the door of
th tabernacl of the congregation: 14:12 and the priest shall take
on he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of
oil, and wave them for a wave offer befor the lord: 14:13 and he
shal slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering
and the burnt offering, in the holi place: for as the sin offer is
th priest's, so is the trespass offering: it is most holy: 14:14 and
th priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and
th priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is
to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of hi right hand, and upon the
great toe of hi right foot: 14:15 and the priest shall take some of
th log of oil, and pour it into the palm of hi own left hand: 14:16
and the priest shall dip hi right finger in the oil that is in his
left hand, and shall sprinkl of the oil with hi finger seven times
befor the lord: 14:17 and of the rest of the oil that is in hi hand
shal the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
b cleansed, and upon the thumb of hi right hand, and upon the great
to of hi right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering: 14:18
and the remnant of the oil that is in the priest' hand he shall pour
upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make
an aton for him befor the lord.

14:19 and the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an
aton for him that is to be cleans from hi uncleanness; and
afterward he shall kill the burnt offering: 14:20 and the priest shall
off the burnt offer and the meat offer upon the altar: and the
priest shall make an aton for him, and he shall be clean.

14:21 and if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take
on lamb for a trespass offer to be waved, to make an aton for
him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat
offering, and a log of oil; 14:22 and two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, such as he is abl to get; and the one shall be a sin
offering, and the other a burnt offering.

14:23 and he shall bring them on the eighth day for hi cleans unto
th priest, unto the door of the tabernacl of the congregation,
befor the lord.

14:24 and the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and
th log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering
befor the lord: 14:25 and he shall kill the lamb of the trespass
offering, and the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass
offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
b cleansed, and upon the thumb of hi right hand, and upon the great
to of hi right foot: 14:26 and the priest shall pour of the oil into
th palm of hi own left hand: 14:27 and the priest shall sprinkle
with hi right finger some of the oil that is in hi left hand seven
tim befor the lord: 14:28 and the priest shall put of the oil that
i in hi hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed, and upon the thumb of hi right hand, and upon the great toe
of hi right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass
offering: 14:29 and the rest of the oil that is in the priest' hand
h shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an
aton for him befor the lord.

14:30 and he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young
pigeons, such as he can get; 14:31 even such as he is abl to get, the
on for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the
meat offering: and the priest shall make an aton for him that is
to be cleans befor the lord.

14:32 thi is the law of him in whom is the plagu of leprosy, whose
hand is not abl to get that which pertaineth to hi cleansing.

14:33 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron, saying, 14:34 when
y be come into the land of canaan, which I give to you for a
possession, and I put the plagu of leprosi in a hous of the land of
your possession; 14:35 and he that owneth the hous shall come and
tel the priest, saying, It seemeth to me there is as it were a plague
in the house: 14:36 then the priest shall command that they empti the
house, befor the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that
i in the hous be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go
in to see the house: 14:37 and he shall look on the plague, and,
behold, if the plagu be in the wall of the hous with hollow
strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight are lower than the wall;
14:38 then the priest shall go out of the hous to the door of the
house, and shut up the hous seven days: 14:39 and the priest shall
com again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, if the plague
b spread in the wall of the house; 14:40 then the priest shall
command that they take away the stone in which the plagu is, and
they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city: 14:41 and
h shall caus the hous to be scrape within round about, and they
shal pour out the dust that they scrape off without the citi into an
unclean place: 14:42 and they shall take other stones, and put them in
th place of those stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall
plaist the house.

14:43 and if the plagu come again, and break out in the house, after
that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scrape the
house, and after it is plaistered; 14:44 then the priest shall come
and look, and, behold, if the plagu be spread in the house, it is a
fret leprosi in the house; it is unclean.

14:45 and he shall break down the house, the stone of it, and the
timb thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry
them forth out of the citi into an unclean place.

14:46 moreov he that goeth into the hous all the while that it is
shut up shall be unclean until the even.

14:47 and he that lieth in the hous shall wash hi clothes; and he
that eateth in the hous shall wash hi clothes.

14:48 and if the priest shall come in, and look upon it, and, behold,
th plagu hath not spread in the house, after the hous was
plaistered: then the priest shall pronounc the hous clean, because
th plagu is healed.

14:49 and he shall take to cleans the hous two birds, and cedar
wood, and scarlet, and hyssop: 14:50 and he shall kill the one of the
bird in an earthen vessel over run water: 14:51 and he shall take
th cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the live bird,
and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the run water,
and sprinkl the hous seven times: 14:52 and he shall cleans the
hous with the blood of the bird, and with the run water, and with
th live bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and
with the scarlet: 14:53 but he shall let go the live bird out of the
citi into the open fields, and make an aton for the house: and it
shal be clean.

14:54 thi is the law for all manner of plagu of leprosy, and scall,
14:55 and for the leprosi of a garment, and of a house, 14:56 and for
a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 14:57 To teach when
it is unclean, and when it is clean: thi is the law of leprosy.

15:1 and the lord spake unto mose and to aaron, saying, 15:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when ani man hath a
run issu out of hi flesh, becaus of hi issu he is unclean.

15:3 and thi shall be hi unclean in hi issue: whether hi flesh
run with hi issue, or hi flesh be stop from hi issue, it is his
uncleanness.

15:4 everi bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and
everi thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.

15:5 and whosoev toucheth hi bed shall wash hi clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:6 and he that sitteth on ani thing whereon he sat that hath the
issu shall wash hi clothes, and bath himself in water, and be
unclean until the even.

15:7 and he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issu shall
wash hi clothes, and bath himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:8 and if he that hath the issu spit upon him that is clean; then
h shall wash hi clothes, and bath himself in water, and be unclean
until the even.

15:9 and what saddl soever he rideth upon that hath the issu shall
b unclean.

15:10 and whosoev toucheth ani thing that wa under him shall be
unclean until the even: and he that beareth ani of those thing shall
wash hi clothes, and bath himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:11 and whomsoev he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not
rins hi hand in water, he shall wash hi clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:12 and the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue,
shal be broken: and everi vessel of wood shall be rins in water.

15:13 and when he that hath an issu is cleans of hi issue; then he
shal number to himself seven day for hi cleansing, and wash his
clothes, and bath hi flesh in run water, and shall be clean.

15:14 and on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or
two young pigeons, and come befor the lord unto the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation, and give them unto the priest: 15:15
and the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the
oth for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an aton for
him befor the lord for hi issue.

15:16 and if ani man' seed of copul go out from him, then he
shal wash all hi flesh in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:17 and everi garment, and everi skin, whereon is the seed of
copulation, shall be wash with water, and be unclean until the even.

15:18 the woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation,
they shall both bath themselv in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:19 and if a woman have an issue, and her issu in her flesh be
blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoev toucheth her
shal be unclean until the even.

15:20 and everi thing that she lieth upon in her separ shall be
unclean: everi thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.

15:21 and whosoev toucheth her bed shall wash hi clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:22 and whosoev toucheth ani thing that she sat upon shall wash
hi clothes, and bath himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:23 and if it be on her bed, or on ani thing whereon she sitteth,
when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.

15:24 and if ani man lie with her at all, and her flower be upon him,
h shall be unclean seven days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall
b unclean.

15:25 and if a woman have an issu of her blood mani day out of the
tim of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her
separation; all the day of the issu of her unclean shall be as
th day of her separation: she shall be unclean.

15:26 everi bed whereon she lieth all the day of her issu shall be
unto her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoev she sitteth upon
shal be unclean, as the unclean of her separation.

15:27 and whosoev toucheth those thing shall be unclean, and shall
wash hi clothes, and bath himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:28 but if she be cleans of her issue, then she shall number to
herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.

15:29 and on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or
two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation.

15:30 and the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the
oth for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an aton for
her befor the lord for the issu of her uncleanness.

15:31 thu shall ye separ the children of israel from their
uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile
mi tabernacl that is among them.

15:32 thi is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed
goeth from him, and is defil therewith; 15:33 and of her that is
sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of
th woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.

16:1 and the lord spake unto mose after the death of the two son of
aaron, when they offer befor the lord, and died; 16:2 and the lord
said unto moses, speak unto aaron thi brother, that he come not at all
tim into the holi place within the vail befor the merci seat, which
i upon the ark; that he die not: for I will appear in the cloud upon
th merci seat.

16:3 thu shall aaron come into the holi place: with a young bullock
for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.

16:4 He shall put on the holi linen coat, and he shall have the linen
breech upon hi flesh, and shall be gird with a linen girdle, and
with the linen mitr shall he be attired: these are holi garments;
therefor shall he wash hi flesh in water, and so put them on.

16:5 and he shall take of the congreg of the children of israel
two kid of the goat for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt
offering.

16:6 and aaron shall offer hi bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and make an aton for himself, and for hi house.

16:7 and he shall take the two goats, and present them befor the lord
at the door of the tabernacl of the congregation.

16:8 and aaron shall cast lot upon the two goats; one lot for the
lord, and the other lot for the scapegoat.

16:9 and aaron shall bring the goat upon which the lord' lot fell,
and offer him for a sin offering.

16:10 but the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall
b present aliv befor the lord, to make an aton with him, and
to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.

16:11 and aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and shall make an aton for himself, and for his
house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offer which is for
himself: 16:12 and he shall take a censer full of burn coal of
fir from off the altar befor the lord, and hi hand full of sweet
incens beaten small, and bring it within the vail: 16:13 and he shall
put the incens upon the fire befor the lord, that the cloud of the
incens may cover the merci seat that is upon the testimony, that he
di not: 16:14 and he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and
sprinkl it with hi finger upon the merci seat eastward; and before
th merci seat shall he sprinkl of the blood with hi finger seven
times.

16:15 then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the
people, and bring hi blood within the vail, and do with that blood as
h did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkl it upon the mercy
seat, and befor the merci seat: 16:16 and he shall make an atonement
for the holi place, becaus of the unclean of the children of
israel, and becaus of their transgress in all their sins: and so
shal he do for the tabernacl of the congregation, that remaineth
among them in the midst of their uncleanness.

16:17 and there shall be no man in the tabernacl of the congregation
when he goeth in to make an aton in the holi place, until he come
out, and have made an aton for himself, and for hi household,
and for all the congreg of israel.

16:18 and he shall go out unto the altar that is befor the lord, and
mak an aton for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock,
and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horn of the altar
round about.

16:19 and he shall sprinkl of the blood upon it with hi finger seven
times, and cleans it, and hallow it from the unclean of the
children of israel.

16:20 and when he hath made an end of reconcil the holi place, and
th tabernacl of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the
liv goat: 16:21 and aaron shall lay both hi hand upon the head of
th live goat, and confess over him all the iniqu of the children
of israel, and all their transgress in all their sins, putting
them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of
a fit man into the wilderness: 16:22 and the goat shall bear upon him
al their iniqu unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go
th goat in the wilderness.

16:23 and aaron shall come into the tabernacl of the congregation,
and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went
into the holi place, and shall leav them there: 16:24 and he shall
wash hi flesh with water in the holi place, and put on hi garments,
and come forth, and offer hi burnt offering, and the burnt offering
of the people, and make an aton for himself, and for the people.

16:25 and the fat of the sin offer shall he burn upon the altar.

16:26 and he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his
clothes, and bath hi flesh in water, and afterward come into the
camp.

16:27 and the bullock for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin
offering, whose blood wa brought in to make aton in the holy
place, shall one carri forth without the camp; and they shall burn in
th fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.

16:28 and he that burneth them shall wash hi clothes, and bath his
flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.

16:29 and thi shall be a statut for ever unto you: that in the
seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your
souls, and do no work at all, whether it be one of your own country,
or a stranger that sojourneth among you: 16:30 for on that day shall
th priest make an aton for you, to cleans you, that ye may be
clean from all your sin befor the lord.

16:31 It shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict
your souls, by a statut for ever.

16:32 and the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall
consecr to minist in the priest' offic in hi father' stead,
shal make the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the
holi garments: 16:33 and he shall make an aton for the holy
sanctuary, and he shall make an aton for the tabernacl of the
congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an aton for
th priests, and for all the peopl of the congregation.

16:34 and thi shall be an everlast statut unto you, to make an
aton for the children of israel for all their sin onc a year.
and he did as the lord command moses.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto aaron, and
unto hi sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto them;
thi is the thing which the lord hath commanded, saying, 17:3 what man
soev there be of the hous of israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb,
or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp, 17:4 and
bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacl of the congregation,
to offer an offer unto the lord befor the tabernacl of the lord;
blood shall be imput unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man
shal be cut off from among hi people: 17:5 To the end that the
children of israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the
open field, even that they may bring them unto the lord, unto the door
of the tabernacl of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them
for peac offer unto the lord.

17:6 and the priest shall sprinkl the blood upon the altar of the
lord at the door of the tabernacl of the congregation, and burn the
fat for a sweet savour unto the lord.

17:7 and they shall no more offer their sacrific unto devils, after
whom they have gone a whoring. thi shall be a statut for ever unto
them throughout their generations.

17:8 and thou shalt say unto them, whatsoev man there be of the
hous of israel, or of the stranger which sojourn among you, that
offereth a burnt offer or sacrifice, 17:9 and bringeth it not unto
th door of the tabernacl of the congregation, to offer it unto the
lord; even that man shall be cut off from among hi people.

17:10 and whatsoev man there be of the hous of israel, or of the
strang that sojourn among you, that eateth ani manner of blood; i
wil even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will
cut him off from among hi people.

17:11 for the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it
to you upon the altar to make an aton for your souls: for it is
th blood that maketh an aton for the soul.

17:12 therefor I said unto the children of israel, No soul of you
shal eat blood, neither shall ani stranger that sojourneth among you
eat blood.

17:13 and whatsoev man there be of the children of israel, or of the
strang that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth ani beast
or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof,
and cover it with dust.

17:14 for it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life
thereof: therefor I said unto the children of israel, Ye shall eat
th blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the
blood thereof: whosoev eateth it shall be cut off.

17:15 and everi soul that eateth that which die of itself, or that
which wa torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or
a stranger, he shall both wash hi clothes, and bath himself in
water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.

17:16 but if he wash them not, nor bath hi flesh; then he shall bear
hi iniquity.

18:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 18:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, I am the lord your god.

18:3 after the do of the land of egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye
not do: and after the do of the land of canaan, whither I bring
you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.

18:4 Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk
therein: I am the lord your god.

18:5 Ye shall therefor keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a
man do, he shall live in them: I am the lord.

18:6 none of you shall approach to ani that is near of kin to him, to
uncov their nakedness: I am the lord.

18:7 the naked of thi father, or the naked of thi mother,
shalt thou not uncover: she is thi mother; thou shalt not uncov her
nakedness.

18:8 the naked of thi father' wife shalt thou not uncover: it is
thi father' nakedness.

18:9 the naked of thi sister, the daughter of thi father, or
daught of thi mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad,
even their naked thou shalt not uncover.

18:10 the naked of thi son' daughter, or of thi daughter's
daughter, even their naked thou shalt not uncover: for their is
thin own nakedness.

18:11 the naked of thi father' wife' daughter, begotten of thy
father, she is thi sister, thou shalt not uncov her nakedness.

18:12 thou shalt not uncov the naked of thi father' sister: she
i thi father' near kinswoman.

18:13 thou shalt not uncov the naked of thi mother' sister: for
sh is thi mother' near kinswoman.

18:14 thou shalt not uncov the naked of thi father' brother,
th shalt not approach to hi wife: she is thine aunt.

18:15 thou shalt not uncov the naked of thi daughter in law: she
i thi son' wife; thou shalt not uncov her nakedness.

18:16 thou shalt not uncov the naked of thi brother' wife: it
i thi brother' nakedness.

18:17 thou shalt not uncov the naked of a woman and her
daughter, neither shalt thou take her son' daughter, or her
daughter' daughter, to uncov her nakedness; for they are her near
kinswomen: it is wickedness.

18:18 neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to
uncov her nakedness, besid the other in her life time.

18:19 also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncov her
nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.

18:20 moreov thou shalt not lie carnal with thi neighbour' wife,
to defil thyself with her.

18:21 and thou shalt not let ani of thi seed pass through the fire to
molech, neither shalt thou profan the name of thi god: I am the lord.

18:22 thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is
abomination.

18:23 neither shalt thou lie with ani beast to defil thyself
therewith: neither shall ani woman stand befor a beast to lie down
thereto: it is confusion.

18:24 defil not ye yourselv in ani of these things: for in all
thes the nation are defil which I cast out befor you: 18:25 and
th land is defiled: therefor I do visit the iniqu thereof upon
it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants.

18:26 Ye shall therefor keep my statut and my judgments, and shall
not commit ani of these abominations; neither ani of your own nation,
nor ani stranger that sojourneth among you: 18:27 (for all these
abomin have the men of the land done, which were befor you, and
th land is defiled;) 18:28 that the land spue not you out also, when
y defil it, as it spu out the nation that were befor you.

18:29 for whosoev shall commit ani of these abominations, even the
soul that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.

18:30 therefor shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any
on of these abomin customs, which were commit befor you, and
that ye defil not yourselv therein: I am the lord your god.

19:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 19:2 speak unto all the
congreg of the children of israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be
holy: for I the lord your god am holy.

19:3 Ye shall fear everi man hi mother, and hi father, and keep my
sabbaths: I am the lord your god.

19:4 turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselv molten gods: I am
th lord your god.

19:5 and if ye offer a sacrific of peac offer unto the lord, ye
shal offer it at your own will.

19:6 It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow:
and if ought remain until the third day, it shall be burnt in the
fire.

19:7 and if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is abominable; it
shal not be accepted.

19:8 therefor everi one that eateth it shall bear hi iniquity,
becaus he hath profan the hallow thing of the lord: and that soul
shal be cut off from among hi people.

19:9 and when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly
reap the corner of thi field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings
of thi harvest.

19:10 and thou shalt not glean thi vineyard, neither shalt thou gather
everi grape of thi vineyard; thou shalt leav them for the poor and
stranger: I am the lord your god.

19:11 Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
another.

19:12 and ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou
profan the name of thi god: I am the lord.

19:13 thou shalt not defraud thi neighbour, neither rob him: the wages
of him that is hire shall not abid with thee all night until the
morning.

19:14 thou shalt not curs the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before
th blind, but shalt fear thi god: I am the lord.

19:15 Ye shall do no unright in judgment: thou shalt not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty:
but in righteous shalt thou judg thi neighbour.

19:16 thou shalt not go up and down as a talebear among thi people:
neith shalt thou stand against the blood of thi neighbour; I am the
lord.

19:17 thou shalt not hate thi brother in thine heart: thou shalt in
ani wise rebuk thi neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.

19:18 thou shalt not avenge, nor bear ani grudg against the children
of thi people, but thou shalt love thi neighbour as thyself: I am the
lord.

19:19 Ye shall keep my statutes. thou shalt not let thi cattl gender
with a divers kind: thou shalt not sow thi field with mingl seed:
neith shall a garment mingl of linen and woollen come upon thee.

19:20 and whosoev lieth carnal with a woman, that is a bondmaid,
betroth to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given
her; she shall be scourged; they shall not be put to death, because
sh wa not free.

19:21 and he shall bring hi trespass offer unto the lord, unto the
door of the tabernacl of the congregation, even a ram for a trespass
offering.

19:22 and the priest shall make an aton for him with the ram of
th trespass offer befor the lord for hi sin which he hath done:
and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven him.

19:23 and when ye shall come into the land, and shall have plant all
mann of tree for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as
uncircumcised: three year shall it be as uncircumcis unto you: it
shal not be eaten of.

19:24 but in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holi to
prais the lord withal.

19:25 and in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it
may yield unto you the increas thereof: I am the lord your god.

19:26 Ye shall not eat ani thing with the blood: neither shall ye use
enchantment, nor observ times.

19:27 Ye shall not round the corner of your heads, neither shalt thou
mar the corner of thi beard.

19:28 Ye shall not make ani cut in your flesh for the dead, nor
print ani mark upon you: I am the lord.

19:29 Do not prostitut thi daughter, to caus her to be a whore; lest
th land fall to whoredom, and the land becom full of wickedness.

19:30 Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and rever my sanctuary: I am the
lord.

19:31 regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
wizards, to be defil by them: I am the lord your god.

19:32 thou shalt rise up befor the hoari head, and honour the face of
th old man, and fear thi god: I am the lord.

19:33 and if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not
vex him.

19:34 but the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one
born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were
strang in the land of egypt: I am the lord your god.

19:35 Ye shall do no unright in judgment, in meteyard, in
weight, or in measure.

19:36 just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall
y have: I am the lord your god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt.

19:37 therefor shall ye observ all my statutes, and all my
judgments, and do them: I am the lord.

20:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 20:2 again, thou shalt say
to the children of israel, whosoev he be of the children of israel,
or of the stranger that sojourn in israel, that giveth ani of his
se unto molech; he shall sure be put to death: the peopl of the
land shall stone him with stones.

20:3 and I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off
from among hi people; becaus he hath given of hi seed unto molech,
to defil my sanctuary, and to profan my holi name.

20:4 and if the peopl of the land do ani way hide their eye from
th man, when he giveth of hi seed unto molech, and kill him not:
20:5 then I will set my face against that man, and against hi family,
and will cut him off, and all that go a whore after him, to commit
whoredom with molech, from among their people.

20:6 and the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits,
and after wizards, to go a whore after them, I will even set my face
against that soul, and will cut him off from among hi people.

20:7 sanctifi yourselv therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the lord
your god.

20:8 and ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: I am the lord which
sanctifi you.

20:9 for everi one that curseth hi father or hi mother shall be
sur put to death: he hath curs hi father or hi mother; his
blood shall be upon him.

20:10 and the man that committeth adulteri with anoth man' wife,
even he that committeth adulteri with hi neighbour' wife, the
adulter and the adulteress shall sure be put to death.

20:11 and the man that lieth with hi father' wife hath uncov his
father' nakedness: both of them shall sure be put to death; their
blood shall be upon them.

20:12 and if a man lie with hi daughter in law, both of them shall
sur be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood shall
b upon them.

20:13 If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both
of them have commit an abomination: they shall sure be put to
death; their blood shall be upon them.

20:14 and if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness: they
shal be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no
wicked among you.

20:15 and if a man lie with a beast, he shall sure be put to death:
and ye shall slay the beast.

20:16 and if a woman approach unto ani beast, and lie down thereto,
th shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall sure be put to
death; their blood shall be upon them.

20:17 and if a man shall take hi sister, hi father' daughter, or
hi mother' daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his
nakedness; it is a wick thing; and they shall be cut off in the
sight of their people: he hath uncov hi sister' nakedness; he
shal bear hi iniquity.

20:18 and if a man shall lie with a woman have her sickness, and
shal uncov her nakedness; he hath discov her fountain, and she
hath uncov the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be
cut off from among their people.

20:19 and thou shalt not uncov the naked of thi mother' sister,
nor of thi father' sister: for he uncovereth hi near kin: they shall
bear their iniquity.

20:20 and if a man shall lie with hi uncle' wife, he hath uncovered
hi uncle' nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die
childless.

20:21 and if a man shall take hi brother' wife, it is an unclean
thing: he hath uncov hi brother' nakedness; they shall be
childless.

20:22 Ye shall therefor keep all my statutes, and all my judgments,
and do them: that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spue
you not out.

20:23 and ye shall not walk in the manner of the nation, which I cast
out befor you: for they commit all these things, and therefor i
abhor them.

20:24 but I have said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and i
wil give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and
honey: I am the lord your god, which have separ you from other
people.

20:25 Ye shall therefor put differ between clean beast and
unclean, and between unclean fowl and clean: and ye shall not make
your soul abomin by beast, or by fowl, or by ani manner of living
th that creepeth on the ground, which I have separ from you as
unclean.

20:26 and ye shall be holi unto me: for I the lord am holy, and have
sev you from other people, that ye should be mine.

20:27 A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a
wizard, shall sure be put to death: they shall stone them with
stones: their blood shall be upon them.

21:1 and the lord said unto moses, speak unto the priest the son of
aaron, and say unto them, there shall none be defil for the dead
among hi people: 21:2 but for hi kin, that is near unto him, that
is, for hi mother, and for hi father, and for hi son, and for his
daughter, and for hi brother.

21:3 and for hi sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath
had no husband; for her may he be defiled.

21:4 but he shall not defil himself, be a chief man among his
people, to profan himself.

21:5 they shall not make bald upon their head, neither shall they
shav off the corner of their beard, nor make ani cut in their
flesh.

21:6 they shall be holi unto their god, and not profan the name of
their god: for the offer of the lord made by fire, and the bread
of their god, they do offer: therefor they shall be holy.

21:7 they shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither
shal they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holi unto
hi god.

21:8 thou shalt sanctifi him therefore; for he offereth the bread of
thi god: he shall be holi unto thee: for I the lord, which sanctify
you, am holy.

21:9 and the daughter of ani priest, if she profan herself by playing
th whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.

21:10 and he that is the high priest among hi brethren, upon whose
head the anoint oil wa poured, and that is consecr to put on
th garments, shall not uncov hi head, nor rend hi clothes; 21:11
neither shall he go in to ani dead body, nor defil himself for his
father, or for hi mother; 21:12 neither shall he go out of the
sanctuary, nor profan the sanctuari of hi god; for the crown of the
anoint oil of hi god is upon him: I am the lord.

21:13 and he shall take a wife in her virginity.

21:14 A widow, or a divorc woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shal he not take: but he shall take a virgin of hi own peopl to
wife.

21:15 neither shall he profan hi seed among hi people: for I the
lord do sanctifi him.

21:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 21:17 speak unto aaron,
saying, whosoev he be of thi seed in their gener that hath any
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of hi god.

21:18 for whatsoev man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not
approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any
th superfluous, 21:19 Or a man that is brokenfooted, or
brokenhanded, 21:20 Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish
in hi eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath hi stone broken; 21:21
no man that hath a blemish of the seed of aaron the priest shall come
nigh to offer the offer of the lord made by fire: he hath a
blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of hi god.

21:22 He shall eat the bread of hi god, both of the most holy, and of
th holy.

21:23 onli he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the
altar, becaus he hath a blemish; that he profan not my sanctuaries:
for I the lord do sanctifi them.

21:24 and mose told it unto aaron, and to hi sons, and unto all the
children of israel.

22:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:2 speak unto aaron and
to hi sons, that they separ themselv from the holi thing of the
children of israel, and that they profan not my holi name in those
th which they hallow unto me: I am the lord.

22:3 say unto them, whosoev he be of all your seed among your
generations, that goeth unto the holi things, which the children of
israel hallow unto the lord, have hi unclean upon him, that
soul shall be cut off from my presence: I am the lord.

22:4 what man soever of the seed of aaron is a leper, or hath a
run issue; he shall not eat of the holi things, until he be clean.
and whoso toucheth ani thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man
whos seed goeth from him; 22:5 Or whosoev toucheth ani creeping
thing, wherebi he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take
uncleanness, whatsoev unclean he hath; 22:6 the soul which hath
touch ani such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the
holi things, unless he wash hi flesh with water.

22:7 and when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward
eat of the holi things; becaus it is hi food.

22:8 that which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shall not
eat to defil himself therewith; I am the lord.

22:9 they shall therefor keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for
it, and die therefore, if they profan it: I the lord do sanctify
them.

22:10 there shall no stranger eat of the holi thing: a sojourn of
th priest, or an hire servant, shall not eat of the holi thing.

22:11 but if the priest buy ani soul with hi money, he shall eat of
it, and he that is born in hi house: they shall eat of hi meat.

22:12 If the priest' daughter also be marri unto a stranger, she
may not eat of an offer of the holi things.

22:13 but if the priest' daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have
no child, and is return unto her father' house, as in her youth,
sh shall eat of her father' meat: but there shall be no stranger eat
thereof.

22:14 and if a man eat of the holi thing unwittingly, then he shall
put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest
with the holi thing.

22:15 and they shall not profan the holi thing of the children of
israel, which they offer unto the lord; 22:16 Or suffer them to bear
th iniqu of trespass, when they eat their holi things: for I the
lord do sanctifi them.

22:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:18 speak unto aaron,
and to hi sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto
them, whatsoev he be of the hous of israel, or of the stranger in
israel, that will offer hi oblat for all hi vows, and for all his
freewil offerings, which they will offer unto the lord for a burnt
offering; 22:19 Ye shall offer at your own will a male without
blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

22:20 but whatsoev hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it
shal not be accept for you.

22:21 and whosoev offereth a sacrific of peac offer unto the
lord to accomplish hi vow, or a freewil offer in beev or sheep,
it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.

22:22 blind, or broken, or maimed, or have a wen, or scurvy, or
scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the lord, nor make an offering
bi fire of them upon the altar unto the lord.

22:23 either a bullock or a lamb that hath ani thing superflu or
lack in hi parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewil offering;
but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

22:24 Ye shall not offer unto the lord that which is bruised, or
crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make ani offer thereof
in your land.

22:25 neither from a stranger' hand shall ye offer the bread of your
god of ani of these; becaus their corrupt is in them, and
blemish be in them: they shall not be accept for you.

22:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:27 when a bullock, or
a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days
und the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be
accept for an offer made by fire unto the lord.

22:28 and whether it be cow, or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her
young both in one day.

22:29 and when ye will offer a sacrific of thanksgiv unto the
lord, offer it at your own will.

22:30 On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leav none of it
until the morrow: I am the lord.

22:31 therefor shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I am the
lord.

22:32 neither shall ye profan my holi name; but I will be hallowed
among the children of israel: I am the lord which hallow you, 22:33
that brought you out of the land of egypt, to be your god: I am the
lord.

23:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, concern the feast of the
lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holi convocations, even these are
mi feasts.

23:3 six day shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath
of rest, an holi convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the
sabbath of the lord in all your dwellings.

23:4 these are the feast of the lord, even holi convocations, which
y shall proclaim in their seasons.

23:5 In the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the lord's
passover.

23:6 and on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of
unleaven bread unto the lord: seven day ye must eat unleavened
bread.

23:7 In the first day ye shall have an holi convocation: ye shall do
no servil work therein.

23:8 but ye shall offer an offer made by fire unto the lord seven
days: in the seventh day is an holi convocation: ye shall do no
servil work therein.

23:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:10 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come into the land
which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye
shal bring a sheaf of the firstfruit of your harvest unto the
priest: 23:11 and he shall wave the sheaf befor the lord, to be
accept for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall
wav it.

23:12 and ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
without blemish of the first year for a burnt offer unto the lord.

23:13 and the meat offer thereof shall be two tenth deal of fine
flour mingl with oil, an offer made by fire unto the lord for a
sweet savour: and the drink offer thereof shall be of wine, the
fourth part of an hin.

23:14 and ye shall eat neither bread, nor parch corn, nor green
ears, until the selfsam day that ye have brought an offer unto
your god: it shall be a statut for ever throughout your generations
in all your dwellings.

23:15 and ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath,
from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven
sabbath shall be complete: 23:16 even unto the morrow after the
seventh sabbath shall ye number fifti days; and ye shall offer a new
meat offer unto the lord.

23:17 Ye shall bring out of your habit two wave loav of two
tenth deals; they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with
leaven; they are the firstfruit unto the lord.

23:18 and ye shall offer with the bread seven lamb without blemish of
th first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be for
a burnt offer unto the lord, with their meat offering, and their
drink offerings, even an offer made by fire, of sweet savour unto
th lord.

23:19 then ye shall sacrific one kid of the goat for a sin offering,
and two lamb of the first year for a sacrific of peac offerings.

23:20 and the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits
for a wave offer befor the lord, with the two lambs: they shall be
holi to the lord for the priest.

23:21 and ye shall proclaim on the selfsam day, that it may be an
holi convoc unto you: ye shall do no servil work therein: it
shal be a statut for ever in all your dwell throughout your
generations.

23:22 and when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make
clean riddanc of the corner of thi field when thou reapest, neither
shalt thou gather ani glean of thi harvest: thou shalt leav them
unto the poor, and to the stranger: I am the lord your god.

23:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:24 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of
th month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memori of blow of trumpets,
an holi convocation.

23:25 Ye shall do no servil work therein: but ye shall offer an
off made by fire unto the lord.

23:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:27 also on the tenth
day of thi seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall
b an holi convoc unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and
off an offer made by fire unto the lord.

23:28 and ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of
atonement, to make an aton for you befor the lord your god.

23:29 for whatsoev soul it be that shall not be afflict in that
sam day, he shall be cut off from among hi people.

23:30 and whatsoev soul it be that doeth ani work in that same day,
th same soul will I destroy from among hi people.

23:31 Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statut for ever
throughout your gener in all your dwellings.

23:32 It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict
your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto
even, shall ye celebr your sabbath.

23:33 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:34 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, the fifteenth day of thi seventh month
shal be the feast of tabernacl for seven day unto the lord.

23:35 On the first day shall be an holi convocation: ye shall do no
servil work therein.

23:36 seven day ye shall offer an offer made by fire unto the
lord: on the eighth day shall be an holi convoc unto you; and ye
shal offer an offer made by fire unto the lord: it is a solemn
assembly; and ye shall do no servil work therein.

23:37 these are the feast of the lord, which ye shall proclaim to be
holi convocations, to offer an offer made by fire unto the lord, a
burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings,
everi thing upon hi day: 23:38 besid the sabbath of the lord, and
besid your gifts, and besid all your vows, and besid all your
freewil offerings, which ye give unto the lord.

23:39 also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
gath in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the lord
seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day
shal be a sabbath.

23:40 and ye shall take you on the first day the bough of goodly
trees, branch of palm trees, and the bough of thick trees, and
willow of the brook; and ye shall rejoic befor the lord your god
seven days.

23:41 and ye shall keep it a feast unto the lord seven day in the
year.

it shall be a statut for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate
it in the seventh month.

23:42 Ye shall dwell in booth seven days; all that are israelites
born shall dwell in booths: 23:43 that your gener may know that
i made the children of israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them
out of the land of egypt: I am the lord your god.

23:44 and mose declar unto the children of israel the feast of the
lord.

24:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:2 command the children
of israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil oliv beaten for the
light, to caus the lamp to burn continually.

24:3 without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacl of the
congregation, shall aaron order it from the even unto the morning
befor the lord continually: it shall be a statut for ever in your
generations.

24:4 He shall order the lamp upon the pure candlestick befor the
lord continually.

24:5 and thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelv cake thereof:
two tenth deal shall be in one cake.

24:6 and thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure
t befor the lord.

24:7 and thou shalt put pure frankincens upon each row, that it may
b on the bread for a memorial, even an offer made by fire unto the
lord.

24:8 everi sabbath he shall set it in order befor the lord
continually, be taken from the children of israel by an everlasting
covenant.

24:9 and it shall be aaron' and hi sons'; and they shall eat it in
th holi place: for it is most holi unto him of the offer of the
lord made by fire by a perpetu statute.

24:10 and the son of an israelitish woman, whose father wa an
egyptian, went out among the children of israel: and thi son of the
israelitish woman and a man of israel strove togeth in the camp;
24:11 and the israelitish woman' son blasphem the name of the lord,
and cursed. and they brought him unto moses: (and hi mother' name
wa shelomith, the daughter of dibri, of the tribe of dan:) 24:12 and
they put him in ward, that the mind of the lord might be shew them.

24:13 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:14 bring forth him
that hath curs without the camp; and let all that heard him lay
their hand upon hi head, and let all the congreg stone him.

24:15 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying,
whosoev curseth hi god shall bear hi sin.

24:16 and he that blasphemeth the name of the lord, he shall sure be
put to death, and all the congreg shall certainli stone him: as
wel the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth
th name of the lord, shall be put to death.

24:17 and he that killeth ani man shall sure be put to death.

24:18 and he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.

24:19 and if a man caus a blemish in hi neighbour; as he hath done,
so shall it be done to him; 24:20 breach for breach, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth: as he hath caus a blemish in a man, so shall it be
don to him again.

24:21 and he that killeth a beast, he shall restor it: and he that
killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

24:22 Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as
for one of your own country: for I am the lord your god.

24:23 and mose spake to the children of israel, that they should
br forth him that had curs out of the camp, and stone him with
stones. and the children of israel did as the lord command moses.

25:1 and the lord spake unto mose in mount sinai, saying, 25:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the
land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the
lord.

25:3 six year thou shalt sow thi field, and six year thou shalt
prun thi vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof; 25:4 but in the
seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for
th lord: thou shalt neither sow thi field, nor prune thi vineyard.

25:5 that which groweth of it own accord of thi harvest thou shalt
not reap, neither gather the grape of thi vine undressed: for it is a
year of rest unto the land.

25:6 and the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and
for thi servant, and for thi maid, and for thi hire servant, and for
thi stranger that sojourneth with thee.

25:7 and for thi cattle, and for the beast that are in thi land, shall
al the increas thereof be meat.

25:8 and thou shalt number seven sabbath of year unto thee, seven
tim seven years; and the space of the seven sabbath of year shall
b unto thee forti and nine years.

25:9 then shalt thou caus the trumpet of the jubil to sound on the
tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of aton shall ye make
th trumpet sound throughout all your land.

25:10 and ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty
throughout all the land unto all the inhabit thereof: it shall be
a jubil unto you; and ye shall return everi man unto hi possession,
and ye shall return everi man unto hi family.

25:11 A jubil shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow,
neith reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes
in it of thi vine undressed.

25:12 for it is the jubile; it shall be holi unto you: ye shall eat
th increas thereof out of the field.

25:13 In the year of thi jubil ye shall return everi man unto his
possession.

25:14 and if thou sell ought unto thi neighbour, or buyest ought of
thi neighbour' hand, ye shall not oppress one another: 25:15
accord to the number of year after the jubil thou shalt buy of
thi neighbour, and accord unto the number of year of the fruit he
shal sell unto thee: 25:16 accord to the multitud of year thou
shalt increas the price thereof, and accord to the few of
year thou shalt diminish the price of it: for accord to the number
of the year of the fruit doth he sell unto thee.

25:17 Ye shall not therefor oppress one another; but thou shalt fear
thi god:for I am the lord your god.

25:18 wherefor ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.

25:19 and the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill,
and dwell therein in safety.

25:20 and if ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year? behold,
w shall not sow, nor gather in our increase: 25:21 then I will
command my bless upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring
forth fruit for three years.

25:22 and ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until
th ninth year; until her fruit come in ye shall eat of the old
store.

25:23 the land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine, for
y are stranger and sojourn with me.

25:24 and in all the land of your possess ye shall grant a
redempt for the land.

25:25 If thi brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his
possession, and if ani of hi kin come to redeem it, then shall he
redeem that which hi brother sold.

25:26 and if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be abl to
redeem it; 25:27 then let him count the year of the sale thereof, and
restor the overplu unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may
return unto hi possession.

25:28 but if he be not abl to restor it to him, then that which is
sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the
year of jubile: and in the jubil it shall go out, and he shall return
unto hi possession.

25:29 and if a man sell a dwell hous in a wall city, then he may
redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; within a full year may
h redeem it.

25:30 and if it be not redeem within the space of a full year, then
th hous that is in the wall citi shall be establish for ever to
him that bought it throughout hi generations: it shall not go out in
th jubile.

25:31 but the hous of the villag which have no wall round about
them shall be count as the field of the country: they may be
redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.

25:32 notwithstand the citi of the levites, and the hous of the
citi of their possession, may the levit redeem at ani time.

25:33 and if a man purchas of the levites, then the hous that was
sold, and the citi of hi possession, shall go out in the year of
jubile: for the hous of the citi of the levit are their
possess among the children of israel.

25:34 but the field of the suburb of their citi may not be sold;
for it is their perpetu possession.

25:35 and if thi brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee;
then thou shalt reliev him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner; that he may live with thee.

25:36 take thou no usuri of him, or increase: but fear thi god; that
thi brother may live with thee.

25:37 thou shalt not give him thi money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victu for increase.

25:38 I am the lord your god, which brought you forth out of the land
of egypt, to give you the land of canaan, and to be your god.

25:39 and if thi brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be
sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serv as a bondservant:
25:40 but as an hire servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with
thee, and shall serv thee unto the year of jubile.

25:41 and then shall he depart from thee, both he and hi children
with him, and shall return unto hi own family, and unto the
possess of hi father shall he return.

25:42 for they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land
of egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.

25:43 thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy
god.

25:44 both thi bondmen, and thi bondmaids, which thou shalt have,
shal be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bondmaids.

25:45 moreov of the children of the stranger that do sojourn among
you, of them shall ye buy, and of their famili that are with you,
which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.

25:46 and ye shall take them as an inherit for your children after
you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for
ever: but over your brethren the children of israel, ye shall not rule
on over anoth with rigour.

25:47 and if a sojourn or stranger wax rich by thee, and thi brother
that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or
sojourn by thee, or to the stock of the stranger' family: 25:48
after that he is sold he may be redeem again; one of hi brethren
may redeem him: 25:49 either hi uncle, or hi uncle' son, may redeem
him, or ani that is nigh of kin unto him of hi famili may redeem him;
or if he be able, he may redeem himself.

25:50 and he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that
h wa sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of hi sale
shal be accord unto the number of years, accord to the time of
an hire servant shall it be with him.

25:51 If there be yet mani year behind, accord unto them he shall
giv again the price of hi redempt out of the money that he was
bought for.

25:52 and if there remain but few year unto the year of jubile, then
h shall count with him, and accord unto hi year shall he give
him again the price of hi redemption.

25:53 and as a yearli hire servant shall he be with him: and the
oth shall not rule with rigour over him in thi sight.

25:54 and if he be not redeem in these years, then he shall go out
in the year of jubile, both he, and hi children with him.

25:55 for unto me the children of israel are servants; they are my
serv whom I brought forth out of the land of egypt: I am the lord
your god.

26:1 Ye shall make you no idol nor graven image, neither rear you up
a stand image, neither shall ye set up ani imag of stone in your
land, to bow down unto it: for I am the lord your god.

26:2 Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and rever my sanctuary: I am the
lord.

26:3 If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
26:4 then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield
her increase, and the tree of the field shall yield their fruit.

26:5 and your thresh shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage
shal reach unto the sow time: and ye shall eat your bread to the
full, and dwell in your land safely.

26:6 and I will give peac in the land, and ye shall lie down, and
non shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beast out of the
land, neither shall the sword go through your land.

26:7 and ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall befor you
bi the sword.

26:8 and five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundr of you
shal put ten thousand to flight: and your enemi shall fall before
y by the sword.

26:9 for I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and
multipli you, and establish my coven with you.

26:10 and ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old becaus of
th new.

26:11 and I set my tabernacl among you: and my soul shall not abhor
you.

26:12 and I will walk among you, and will be your god, and ye shall be
mi people.

26:13 I am the lord your god, which brought you forth out of the land
of egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the
band of your yoke, and made you go upright.

26:14 but if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
commandments; 26:15 and if ye shall despis my statutes, or if your
soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments,
but that ye break my covenant: 26:16 I also will do thi unto you; i
wil even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burn ague,
that shall consum the eyes, and caus sorrow of heart: and ye shall
sow your seed in vain, for your enemi shall eat it.

26:17 and I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before
your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall
fle when none pursueth you.

26:18 and if ye will not yet for all thi hearken unto me, then I will
punish you seven time more for your sins.

26:19 and I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your
heaven as iron, and your earth as brass: 26:20 and your strength shall
b spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither
shal the tree of the land yield their fruits.

26:21 and if ye walk contrari unto me, and will not hearken unto me; i
wil bring seven time more plagu upon you accord to your sins.

26:22 I will also send wild beast among you, which shall rob you of
your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number;
and your high way shall be desolate.

26:23 and if ye will not be reform by me by these things, but will
walk contrari unto me; 26:24 then will I also walk contrari unto you,
and will punish you yet seven time for your sins.

26:25 and I will bring a sword upon you, that shall aveng the quarrel
of my covenant: and when ye are gather togeth within your cities,
i will send the pestil among you; and ye shall be deliv into
th hand of the enemy.

26:26 and when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall
bak your bread in one oven, and they shall deliv you your bread
again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.

26:27 and if ye will not for all thi hearken unto me, but walk
contrari unto me; 26:28 then I will walk contrari unto you also in
fury; and I, even I, will chastis you seven time for your sins.

26:29 and ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
daught shall ye eat.

26:30 and I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images,
and cast your carcas upon the carcas of your idols, and my soul
shal abhor you.

26:31 and I will make your citi waste, and bring your sanctuaries
unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.

26:32 and I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies
which dwell therein shall be astonish at it.

26:33 and I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a
sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities
waste.

26:34 then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth
desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land
rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

26:35 As long as it lieth desol it shall rest; becaus it did not
rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.

26:36 and upon them that are left aliv of you I will send a faintness
into their heart in the land of their enemies; and the sound of a
shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as flee from a
sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.

26:37 and they shall fall one upon another, as it were befor a sword,
when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand befor your
enemies.

26:38 and ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your
enemi shall eat you up.

26:39 and they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity
in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniqu of their fathers
shal they pine away with them.

26:40 If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniqu of their
fathers, with their trespass which they trespass against me, and
that also they have walk contrari unto me; 26:41 and that I also
hav walk contrari unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcis heart be humbled, and they
then accept of the punish of their iniquity: 26:42 then will i
rememb my coven with jacob, and also my coven with isaac, and
also my coven with abraham will I remember; and I will rememb the
land.

26:43 the land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desol without them: and they shall accept
of the punish of their iniquity: because, even becaus they
despis my judgments, and becaus their soul abhor my statutes.

26:44 and yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
i will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break my coven with them: for I am the lord their
god.

26:45 but I will for their sake rememb the coven of their
ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of egypt in the sight
of the heathen, that I might be their god: I am the lord.

26:46 these are the statut and judgment and laws, which the lord
mad between him and the children of israel in mount sinai by the hand
of moses.

27:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 27:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when a man shall make a
singular vow, the person shall be for the lord by thi estimation.

27:3 and thi estim shall be of the male from twenti year old
even unto sixti year old, even thi estim shall be fifti shekels
of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

27:4 and if it be a female, then thi estim shall be thirty
shekels.

27:5 and if it be from five year old even unto twenti year old, then
thi estim shall be of the male twenti shekels, and for the female
ten shekels.

27:6 and if it be from a month old even unto five year old, then thy
estim shall be of the male five shekel of silver, and for the
femal thi estim shall be three shekel of silver.

27:7 and if it be from sixti year old and above; if it be a male,
then thi estim shall be fifteen shekels, and for the femal ten
shekels.

27:8 but if he be poorer than thi estimation, then he shall present
himself befor the priest, and the priest shall valu him; according
to hi abil that vow shall the priest valu him.

27:9 and if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offer unto the
lord, all that ani man giveth of such unto the lord shall be holy.

27:10 He shall not alter it, nor chang it, a good for a bad, or a bad
for a good: and if he shall at all chang beast for beast, then it and
th exchang thereof shall be holy.

27:11 and if it be ani unclean beast, of which they do not offer a
sacrific unto the lord, then he shall present the beast befor the
priest: 27:12 and the priest shall valu it, whether it be good or
bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.

27:13 but if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part
thereof unto thi estimation.

27:14 and when a man shall sanctifi hi hous to be holi unto the
lord, then the priest shall estim it, whether it be good or bad: as
th priest shall estim it, so shall it stand.

27:15 and if he that sanctifi it will redeem hi house, then he
shal add the fifth part of the money of thi estim unto it, and
it shall be his.

27:16 and if a man shall sanctifi unto the lord some part of a field
of hi possession, then thi estim shall be accord to the seed
thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valu at fifti shekel of
silver.

27:17 If he sanctifi hi field from the year of jubile, accord to
thi estim it shall stand.

27:18 but if he sanctifi hi field after the jubile, then the priest
shal reckon unto him the money accord to the year that remain,
even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abat from thy
estimation.

27:19 and if he that sanctifi the field will in ani wise redeem it,
then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thi estim unto
it, and it shall be assur to him.

27:20 and if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the
field to anoth man, it shall not be redeem ani more.

27:21 but the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy
unto the lord, as a field devoted; the possess thereof shall be the
priest's.

27:22 and if a man sanctifi unto the lord a field which he hath
bought, which is not of the field of hi possession; 27:23 then the
priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thi estimation, even unto
th year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estim in that
day, as a holi thing unto the lord.

27:24 In the year of the jubil the field shall return unto him of
whom it wa bought, even to him to whom the possess of the land did
belong.

27:25 and all thi estim shall be accord to the shekel of the
sanctuary: twenti gerah shall be the shekel.

27:26 onli the firstl of the beasts, which should be the lord's
firstling, no man shall sanctifi it; whether it be ox, or sheep: it is
th lord's.

27:27 and if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it
accord to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth part of it
thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold accord to
thi estimation.

27:28 notwithstand no devot thing, that a man shall devot unto
th lord of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field
of hi possession, shall be sold or redeemed: everi devot thing is
most holi unto the lord.

27:29 none devoted, which shall be devot of men, shall be redeemed;
but shall sure be put to death.

27:30 and all the tith of the land, whether of the seed of the land,
or of the fruit of the tree, is the lord's: it is holi unto the lord.

27:31 and if a man will at all redeem ought of hi tithes, he shall
add thereto the fifth part thereof.

27:32 and concern the tith of the herd, or of the flock, even of
whatsoev passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holi unto the
lord.

27:33 He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he
chang it: and if he chang it at all, then both it and the change
thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

27:34 these are the commandments, which the lord command mose for
th children of israel in mount sinai.




th fourth book of moses:  call numbers


1:1 and the lord spake unto mose in the wilder of sinai, in the
tabernacl of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
in the second year after they were come out of the land of egypt,
saying, 1:2 take ye the sum of all the congreg of the children of
israel, after their families, by the hous of their fathers, with the
numb of their names, everi male by their polls; 1:3 from twenty
year old and upward, all that are abl to go forth to war in israel:
th and aaron shall number them by their armies.

1:4 and with you there shall be a man of everi tribe; everi one head
of the hous of hi fathers.

1:5 and these are the name of the men that shall stand with you: of
th tribe of reuben; elizur the son of shedeur.

1:6 Of simeon; shelumiel the son of zurishaddai.

1:7 Of judah; nahshon the son of amminadab.

1:8 Of issachar; nethaneel the son of zuar.

1:9 Of zebulun; eliab the son of helon.

1:10 Of the children of joseph: of ephraim; elishama the son of
ammihud: of manasseh; gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

1:11 Of benjamin; abidan the son of gideoni.

1:12 Of dan; ahiez the son of ammishaddai.

1:13 Of asher; pagiel the son of ocran.

1:14 Of gad; eliasaph the son of deuel.

1:15 Of naphtali; ahira the son of enan.

1:16 these were the renown of the congregation, princ of the
trib of their fathers, head of thousand in israel.

1:17 and mose and aaron took these men which are express by their
names: 1:18 and they assembl all the congreg togeth on the
first day of the second month, and they declar their pedigre after
their families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number
of the names, from twenti year old and upward, by their polls.

1:19 As the lord command moses, so he number them in the
wild of sinai.

1:20 and the children of reuben, israel' eldest son, by their
generations, after their families, by the hous of their fathers,
accord to the number of the names, by their polls, everi male from
twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go forth to war;
1:21 those that were number of them, even of the tribe of reuben,
wer forti and six thousand and five hundred.

1:22 Of the children of simeon, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, those that were number of
them, accord to the number of the names, by their polls, everi male
from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go forth to
war; 1:23 those that were number of them, even of the tribe of
simeon, were fifti and nine thousand and three hundred.

1:24 Of the children of gad, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:25 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of gad, were forti and five thousand six hundr and fifty.

1:26 Of the children of judah, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:27 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of judah, were threescor and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

1:28 Of the children of issachar, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:29 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of issachar, were fifti and four thousand and four hundred.

1:30 Of the children of zebulun, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:31 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of zebulun, were fifti and seven thousand and four hundred.

1:32 Of the children of joseph, namely, of the children of ephraim, by
their generations, after their families, by the hous of their
fathers, accord to the number of the names, from twenti year old
and upward, all that were abl to go forth to war; 1:33 those that
wer number of them, even of the tribe of ephraim, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

1:34 Of the children of manasseh, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:35 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of manasseh, were thirti and two thousand and two hundred.

1:36 Of the children of benjamin, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:37 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of benjamin, were thirti and five thousand and four hundred.

1:38 Of the children of dan, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:39 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of dan, were threescor and two thousand and seven hundred.

1:40 Of the children of asher, by their generations, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number of
th names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to go
forth to war; 1:41 those that were number of them, even of the tribe
of asher, were forti and one thousand and five hundred.

1:42 Of the children of naphtali, throughout their generations, after
their families, by the hous of their fathers, accord to the number
of the names, from twenti year old and upward, all that were abl to
go forth to war; 1:43 those that were number of them, even of the
trib of naphtali, were fifti and three thousand and four hundred.

1:44 these are those that were numbered, which mose and aaron
numbered, and the princ of israel, be twelv men: each one was
for the hous of hi fathers.

1:45 So were all those that were number of the children of israel,
bi the hous of their fathers, from twenti year old and upward, all
that were abl to go forth to war in israel; 1:46 even all they that
wer number were six hundr thousand and three thousand and five
hundr and fifty.

1:47 but the levit after the tribe of their father were not
numb among them.

1:48 for the lord had spoken unto moses, saying, 1:49 onli thou shalt
not number the tribe of levi, neither take the sum of them among the
children of israel: 1:50 but thou shalt appoint the levit over the
tabernacl of testimony, and over all the vessel thereof, and over
al thing that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all
th vessel thereof; and they shall minist unto it, and shall encamp
round about the tabernacle.

1:51 and when the tabernacl setteth forward, the levit shall take
it down: and when the tabernacl is to be pitched, the levit shall
set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

1:52 and the children of israel shall pitch their tents, everi man by
hi own camp, and everi man by hi own standard, throughout their
hosts.

1:53 but the levit shall pitch round about the tabernacl of
testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congreg of the
children of israel: and the levit shall keep the charg of the
tabernacl of testimony.

1:54 and the children of israel did accord to all that the lord
command moses, so did they.

2:1 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron, saying, 2:2 every
man of the children of israel shall pitch by hi own standard, with
th ensign of their father' house: far off about the tabernacl of
th congreg shall they pitch.

2:3 and on the east side toward the rise of the sun shall they of
th standard of the camp of judah pitch throughout their armies: and
nahshon the son of amminadab shall be captain of the children of
judah.

2:4 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were
threescor and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

2:5 and those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of
issachar: and nethaneel the son of zuar shall be captain of the
children of issachar.

2:6 and hi host, and those that were number thereof, were fifti and
four thousand and four hundred.

2:7 then the tribe of zebulun: and eliab the son of helon shall be
captain of the children of zebulun.

2:8 and hi host, and those that were number thereof, were fifti and
seven thousand and four hundred.

2:9 all that were number in the camp of judah were an hundred
thousand and fourscor thousand and six thousand and four hundred,
throughout their armies. these shall first set forth.

2:10 On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of reuben
accord to their armies: and the captain of the children of reuben
shal be elizur the son of shedeur.

2:11 and hi host, and those that were number thereof, were forty
and six thousand and five hundred.

2:12 and those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of simeon: and
th captain of the children of simeon shall be shelumiel the son of
zurishaddai.

2:13 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were fifty
and nine thousand and three hundred.

2:14 then the tribe of gad: and the captain of the son of gad shall
b eliasaph the son of reuel.

2:15 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were forty
and five thousand and six hundr and fifty.

2:16 all that were number in the camp of reuben were an hundred
thousand and fifti and one thousand and four hundr and fifty,
throughout their armies. and they shall set forth in the second rank.

2:17 then the tabernacl of the congreg shall set forward with
th camp of the levit in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so
shal they set forward, everi man in hi place by their standards.

2:18 On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of ephraim
accord to their armies: and the captain of the son of ephraim
shal be elishama the son of ammihud.

2:19 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

2:20 and by him shall be the tribe of manasseh: and the captain of the
children of manasseh shall be gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

2:21 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were thirty
and two thousand and two hundred.

2:22 then the tribe of benjamin: and the captain of the son of
benjamin shall be abidan the son of gideoni.

2:23 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were thirty
and five thousand and four hundred.

2:24 all that were number of the camp of ephraim were an hundred
thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies.
and they shall go forward in the third rank.

2:25 the standard of the camp of dan shall be on the north side by
their armies: and the captain of the children of dan shall be ahiezer
th son of ammishaddai.

2:26 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were
threescor and two thousand and seven hundred.

2:27 and those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of asher: and the
captain of the children of asher shall be pagiel the son of ocran.

2:28 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were forty
and one thousand and five hundred.

2:29 then the tribe of naphtali: and the captain of the children of
naphtali shall be ahira the son of enan.

2:30 and hi host, and those that were number of them, were fifty
and three thousand and four hundred.

2:31 all they that were number in the camp of dan were an hundred
thousand and fifti and seven thousand and six hundred. they shall go
hindmost with their standards.

2:32 these are those which were number of the children of israel by
th hous of their fathers: all those that were number of the camps
throughout their host were six hundr thousand and three thousand
and five hundr and fifty.

2:33 but the levit were not number among the children of israel;
a the lord command moses.

2:34 and the children of israel did accord to all that the lord
command moses: so they pitch by their standards, and so they set
forward, everi one after their families, accord to the hous of
their fathers.

3:1 these also are the gener of aaron and mose in the day that
th lord spake with mose in mount sinai.

3:2 and these are the name of the son of aaron; nadab the firstborn,
and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

3:3 these are the name of the son of aaron, the priest which were
anointed, whom he consecr to minist in the priest' office.

3:4 and nadab and abihu die befor the lord, when they offered
strang fire befor the lord, in the wilder of sinai, and they had
no children: and eleazar and ithamar minist in the priest' office
in the sight of aaron their father.

3:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:6 bring the tribe of levi
near, and present them befor aaron the priest, that they may minister
unto him.

3:7 and they shall keep hi charge, and the charg of the whole
congreg befor the tabernacl of the congregation, to do the
servic of the tabernacle.

3:8 and they shall keep all the instrument of the tabernacl of the
congregation, and the charg of the children of israel, to do the
servic of the tabernacle.

3:9 and thou shalt give the levit unto aaron and to hi sons: they
ar wholli given unto him out of the children of israel.

3:10 and thou shalt appoint aaron and hi sons, and they shall wait on
their priest' office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put
to death.

3:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:12 and I, behold, I have
taken the levit from among the children of israel instead of all the
firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of israel:
therefor the levit shall be mine; 3:13 becaus all the firstborn
ar mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of
egypt I hallow unto me all the firstborn in israel, both man and
beast: mine shall they be: I am the lord.

3:14 and the lord spake unto mose in the wilder of sinai, saying,
3:15 number the children of levi after the hous of their fathers, by
their families: everi male from a month old and upward shalt thou
numb them.

3:16 and mose number them accord to the word of the lord, as he
wa commanded.

3:17 and these were the son of levi by their names; gershon, and
kohath, and merari.

3:18 and these are the name of the son of gershon by their families;
libni, and shimei.

3:19 and the son of kohath by their families; amram, and izehar,
hebron, and uzziel.

3:20 and the son of merari by their families; mahli, and mushi. these
ar the famili of the levit accord to the hous of their
fathers.

3:21 Of gershon wa the famili of the libnites, and the famili of the
shimites: these are the famili of the gershonites.

3:22 those that were number of them, accord to the number of all
th males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered
of them were seven thousand and five hundred.

3:23 the famili of the gershonit shall pitch behind the tabernacle
westward.

3:24 and the chief of the hous of the father of the gershonit shall
b eliasaph the son of lael.

3:25 and the charg of the son of gershon in the tabernacl of the
congreg shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering
thereof, and the hang for the door of the tabernacl of the
congregation, 3:26 and the hang of the court, and the curtain for
th door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar
round about, and the cord of it for all the servic thereof.

3:27 and of kohath wa the famili of the amramites, and the famili of
th izeharites, and the famili of the hebronites, and the famili of
th uzzielites: these are the famili of the kohathites.

3:28 In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were
eight thousand and six hundred, keep the charg of the sanctuary.

3:29 the famili of the son of kohath shall pitch on the side of the
tabernacl southward.

3:30 and the chief of the hous of the father of the famili of the
kohathit shall be elizaphan the son of uzziel.

3:31 and their charg shall be the ark, and the table, and the
candlestick, and the altars, and the vessel of the sanctuary
wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the servic thereof.

3:32 and eleazar the son of aaron the priest shall be chief over the
chief of the levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the
charg of the sanctuary.

3:33 Of merari wa the famili of the mahlites, and the famili of the
mushites: these are the famili of merari.

3:34 and those that were number of them, accord to the number of
al the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two
hundred.

3:35 and the chief of the hous of the father of the famili of
merari wa zuriel the son of abihail: these shall pitch on the side of
th tabernacl northward.

3:36 and under the custodi and charg of the son of merari shall be
th board of the tabernacle, and the bar thereof, and the pillars
thereof, and the socket thereof, and all the vessel thereof, and all
that serveth thereto, 3:37 and the pillar of the court round about,
and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.

3:38 but those that encamp befor the tabernacl toward the east, even
befor the tabernacl of the congreg eastward, shall be moses,
and aaron and hi sons, keep the charg of the sanctuari for the
charg of the children of israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh
shal be put to death.

3:39 all that were number of the levites, which mose and aaron
numb at the command of the lord, throughout their families,
al the male from a month old and upward, were twenti and two
thousand.

3:40 and the lord said unto moses, number all the firstborn of the
mal of the children of israel from a month old and upward, and take
th number of their names.

3:41 and thou shalt take the levit for me (I am the lord) instead of
al the firstborn among the children of israel; and the cattl of the
levit instead of all the firstl among the cattl of the children
of israel.

3:42 and mose numbered, as the lord command him, all the firstborn
among the children of israel.

3:43 and all the firstborn male by the number of names, from a month
old and upward, of those that were number of them, were twenti and
two thousand two hundr and threescor and thirteen.

3:44 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:45 take the levites
instead of all the firstborn among the children of israel, and the
cattl of the levit instead of their cattle; and the levit shall
b mine: I am the lord.

3:46 and for those that are to be redeem of the two hundr and
threescor and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of israel,
which are more than the levites; 3:47 thou shalt even take five
shekel apiec by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuari shalt
thou take them: (the shekel is twenti gerahs:) 3:48 and thou shalt
giv the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed,
unto aaron and to hi sons.

3:49 and mose took the redempt money of them that were over and
abov them that were redeem by the levites: 3:50 Of the firstborn of
th children of israel took he the money; a thousand three hundr and
threescor and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 3:51
and mose gave the money of them that were redeem unto aaron and to
hi sons, accord to the word of the lord, as the lord commanded
moses.

4:1 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron, saying, 4:2 take the
sum of the son of kohath from among the son of levi, after their
families, by the hous of their fathers, 4:3 from thirti year old and
upward even until fifti year old, all that enter into the host, to do
th work in the tabernacl of the congregation.

4:4 thi shall be the servic of the son of kohath in the tabernacle
of the congregation, about the most holi things: 4:5 and when the camp
setteth forward, aaron shall come, and hi sons, and they shall take
down the cover vail, and cover the ark of testimoni with it: 4:6
and shall put thereon the cover of badgers' skins, and shall spread
ov it a cloth wholli of blue, and shall put in the stave thereof.

4:7 and upon the tabl of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,
and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers
to cover withal: and the continu bread shall be thereon: 4:8 and
they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same
with a cover of badgers' skins, and shall put in the staves
thereof.

4:9 and they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of
th light, and hi lamps, and hi tongs, and hi snuffdishes, and all
th oil vessel thereof, wherewith they minist unto it: 4:10 and
they shall put it and all the vessel thereof within a cover of
badgers' skins, and shall put it upon a bar.

4:11 and upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and
cov it with a cover of badgers' skins, and shall put to the
stav thereof: 4:12 and they shall take all the instrument of
ministry, wherewith they minist in the sanctuary, and put them in a
cloth of blue, and cover them with a cover of badgers' skins, and
shal put them on a bar: 4:13 and they shall take away the ash from
th altar, and spread a purpl cloth thereon: 4:14 and they shall put
upon it all the vessel thereof, wherewith they minist about it,
even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all
th vessel of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a cover of
badgers' skins, and put to the stave of it.

4:15 and when aaron and hi son have made an end of cover the
sanctuary, and all the vessel of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set
forward; after that, the son of kohath shall come to bear it: but
they shall not touch ani holi thing, lest they die. these thing are
th burden of the son of kohath in the tabernacl of the
congregation.

4:16 and to the offic of eleazar the son of aaron the priest
pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily
meat offering, and the anoint oil, and the oversight of all the
tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the
vessel thereof.

4:17 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron saying, 4:18 cut ye
not off the tribe of the famili of the kohathit from among the
levites: 4:19 but thu do unto them, that they may live, and not die,
when they approach unto the most holi things: aaron and hi son shall
go in, and appoint them everi one to hi servic and to hi burden:
4:20 but they shall not go in to see when the holi thing are covered,
lest they die.

4:21 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:22 take also the sum of
th son of gershon, throughout the hous of their fathers, by their
families; 4:23 from thirti year old and upward until fifti year old
shalt thou number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to
do the work in the tabernacl of the congregation.

4:24 thi is the servic of the famili of the gershonites, to serve,
and for burdens: 4:25 and they shall bear the curtain of the
tabernacle, and the tabernacl of the congregation, hi covering, and
th cover of the badgers' skin that is abov upon it, and the
hang for the door of the tabernacl of the congregation, 4:26 and
th hang of the court, and the hang for the door of the gate of
th court, which is by the tabernacl and by the altar round about,
and their cords, and all the instrument of their service, and all
that is made for them: so shall they serve.

4:27 At the appoint of aaron and hi son shall be all the service
of the son of the gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their
service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charg all their burdens.

4:28 thi is the servic of the famili of the son of gershon in the
tabernacl of the congregation: and their charg shall be under the
hand of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

4:29 As for the son of merari, thou shalt number them after their
families, by the hous of their fathers; 4:30 from thirti year old
and upward even unto fifti year old shalt thou number them, everi one
that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacl of
th congregation.

4:31 and thi is the charg of their burden, accord to all their
servic in the tabernacl of the congregation; the board of the
tabernacle, and the bar thereof, and the pillar thereof, and sockets
thereof, 4:32 and the pillar of the court round about, and their
sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments,
and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the
instru of the charg of their burden.

4:33 thi is the servic of the famili of the son of merari,
accord to all their service, in the tabernacl of the congregation,
und the hand of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

4:34 and mose and aaron and the chief of the congreg numbered
th son of the kohathit after their families, and after the house
of their fathers, 4:35 from thirti year old and upward even unto
fifti year old, everi one that entereth into the service, for the
work in the tabernacl of the congregation: 4:36 and those that were
numb of them by their famili were two thousand seven hundr and
fifty.

4:37 these were they that were number of the famili of the
kohathites, all that might do servic in the tabernacl of the
congregation, which mose and aaron did number accord to the
command of the lord by the hand of moses.

4:38 and those that were number of the son of gershon, throughout
their families, and by the hous of their fathers, 4:39 from thirty
year old and upward even unto fifti year old, everi one that
entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacl of the
congregation, 4:40 even those that were number of them, throughout
their families, by the hous of their fathers, were two thousand and
six hundr and thirty.

4:41 these are they that were number of the famili of the son of
gershon, of all that might do servic in the tabernacl of the
congregation, whom mose and aaron did number accord to the
command of the lord.

4:42 and those that were number of the famili of the son of
merari, throughout their families, by the hous of their fathers, 4:43
from thirti year old and upward even unto fifti year old, everi one
that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacl of the
congregation, 4:44 even those that were number of them after their
families, were three thousand and two hundred.

4:45 these be those that were number of the famili of the son of
merari, whom mose and aaron number accord to the word of the
lord by the hand of moses.

4:46 all those that were number of the levites, whom mose and aaron
and the chief of israel numbered, after their families, and after the
hous of their fathers, 4:47 from thirti year old and upward even
unto fifti year old, everi one that came to do the servic of the
ministry, and the servic of the burden in the tabernacl of the
congregation.

4:48 even those that were number of them, were eight thousand and
fiv hundr and fourscore, 4:49 accord to the command of the
lord they were number by the hand of moses, everi one accord to
hi service, and accord to hi burden: thu were they number of
him, as the lord command moses.

5:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:2 command the children of
israel, that they put out of the camp everi leper, and everi one that
hath an issue, and whosoev is defil by the dead: 5:3 both male and
femal shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they
defil not their camps, in the midst whereof I dwell.

5:4 and the children of israel did so, and put them out without the
camp: as the lord spake unto moses, so did the children of israel.

5:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:6 speak unto the children
of israel, when a man or woman shall commit ani sin that men commit,
to do a trespass against the lord, and that person be guilty; 5:7 then
they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall
recompens hi trespass with the princip thereof, and add unto it
th fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath
trespassed.

5:8 but if the man have no kinsman to recompens the trespass unto,
let the trespass be recompens unto the lord, even to the priest;
besid the ram of the atonement, wherebi an aton shall be made
for him.

5:9 and everi offer of all the holi thing of the children of
israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.

5:10 and everi man' hallow thing shall be his: whatsoev ani man
giveth the priest, it shall be his.

5:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:12 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, If ani man' wife go aside, and
commit a trespass against him, 5:13 and a man lie with her carnally,
and it be hid from the eye of her husband, and be kept close, and she
b defiled, and there be no wit against her, neither she be taken
with the manner; 5:14 and the spirit of jealousi come upon him, and he
b jealou of hi wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of
jealousi come upon him, and he be jealou of hi wife, and she be not
defiled: 5:15 then shall the man bring hi wife unto the priest, and
h shall bring her offer for her, the tenth part of an ephah of
barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense
thereon; for it is an offer of jealousy, an offer of memorial,
bring iniqu to remembrance.

5:16 and the priest shall bring her near, and set her befor the lord:
5:17 and the priest shall take holi water in an earthen vessel; and of
th dust that is in the floor of the tabernacl the priest shall take,
and put it into the water: 5:18 and the priest shall set the woman
befor the lord, and uncov the woman' head, and put the offer of
memori in her hands, which is the jealousi offering: and the priest
shal have in hi hand the bitter water that causeth the curse: 5:19
and the priest shall charg her by an oath, and say unto the woman, if
no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone asid to
unclean with anoth instead of thi husband, be thou free from
thi bitter water that causeth the curse: 5:20 but if thou hast gone
asid to anoth instead of thi husband, and if thou be defiled, and
som man have lain with thee besid thine husband: 5:21 then the
priest shall charg the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest
shal say unto the woman, the lord make thee a curs and an oath among
thi people, when the lord doth make thi thigh to rot, and thi belli to
swell; 5:22 and thi water that causeth the curs shall go into thy
bowels, to make thi belli to swell, and thi thigh to rot: and the
woman shall say, amen, amen.

5:23 and the priest shall write these curs in a book, and he shall
blot them out with the bitter water: 5:24 and he shall caus the woman
to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the water that
causeth the curs shall enter into her, and becom bitter.

5:25 then the priest shall take the jealousi offer out of the
woman' hand, and shall wave the offer befor the lord, and offer
it upon the altar: 5:26 and the priest shall take an hand of the
offering, even the memori thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and
afterward shall caus the woman to drink the water.

5:27 and when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come
to pass, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her
husband, that the water that causeth the curs shall enter into her,
and becom bitter, and her belli shall swell, and her thigh shall rot:
and the woman shall be a curs among her people.

5:28 and if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be
free, and shall conceiv seed.

5:29 thi is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth asid to another
instead of her husband, and is defiled; 5:30 Or when the spirit of
jealousi cometh upon him, and he be jealou over hi wife, and shall
set the woman befor the lord, and the priest shall execut upon her
al thi law.

5:31 then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and thi woman
shal bear her iniquity.

6:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:2 speak unto the children
of israel, and say unto them, when either man or woman shall separate
themselv to vow a vow of a nazarite, to separ themselv unto the
lord: 6:3 He shall separ himself from wine and strong drink, and
shal drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither
shal he drink ani liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.

6:4 all the day of hi separ shall he eat noth that is made
of the vine tree, from the kernel even to the husk.

6:5 all the day of the vow of hi separ there shall no razor
com upon hi head: until the day be fulfilled, in the which he
separateth himself unto the lord, he shall be holy, and shall let the
lock of the hair of hi head grow.

6:6 all the day that he separateth himself unto the lord he shall
com at no dead body.

6:7 He shall not make himself unclean for hi father, or for his
mother, for hi brother, or for hi sister, when they die: becaus the
consecr of hi god is upon hi head.

6:8 all the day of hi separ he is holi unto the lord.

6:9 and if ani man die veri suddenli by him, and he hath defil the
head of hi consecration; then he shall shave hi head in the day of
hi cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.

6:10 and on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young
pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacl of the
congregation: 6:11 and the priest shall offer the one for a sin
offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make an atonement
for him, for that he sin by the dead, and shall hallow hi head
that same day.

6:12 and he shall consecr unto the lord the day of hi separation,
and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering: but
th day that were befor shall be lost, becaus hi separ was
defiled.

6:13 and thi is the law of the nazarite, when the day of his
separ are fulfilled: he shall be brought unto the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation: 6:14 and he shall offer hi offering
unto the lord, one he lamb of the first year without blemish for a
burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for
a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for peac offerings, 6:15
and a basket of unleaven bread, cake of fine flour mingl with
oil, and wafer of unleaven bread anoint with oil, and their meat
offering, and their drink offerings.

6:16 and the priest shall bring them befor the lord, and shall offer
hi sin offering, and hi burnt offering: 6:17 and he shall offer the
ram for a sacrific of peac offer unto the lord, with the basket
of unleaven bread: the priest shall offer also hi meat offering,
and hi drink offering.

6:18 and the nazarit shall shave the head of hi separ at the
door of the tabernacl of the congregation, and shall take the hair of
th head of hi separation, and put it in the fire which is under the
sacrific of the peac offerings.

6:19 and the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one
unleaven cake out of the basket, and one unleaven wafer, and shall
put them upon the hand of the nazarite, after the hair of his
separ is shaven: 6:20 and the priest shall wave them for a wave
off befor the lord: thi is holi for the priest, with the wave
breast and heav shoulder: and after that the nazarit may drink wine.

6:21 thi is the law of the nazarit who hath vowed, and of his
off unto the lord for hi separation, besid that that hi hand
shal get: accord to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after
th law of hi separation.

6:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:23 speak unto aaron and
unto hi sons, saying, On thi wise ye shall bless the children of
israel, say unto them, 6:24 the lord bless thee, and keep thee:
6:25 the lord make hi face shine upon thee, and be graciou unto
thee: 6:26 the lord lift up hi counten upon thee, and give thee
peace.

6:27 and they shall put my name upon the children of israel, and i
wil bless them.

7:1 and it came to pass on the day that mose had fulli set up the
tabernacle, and had anoint it, and sanctifi it, and all the
instru thereof, both the altar and all the vessel thereof, and
had anoint them, and sanctifi them; 7:2 that the princ of
israel, head of the hous of their fathers, who were the princ of
th tribes, and were over them that were numbered, offered: 7:3 and
they brought their offer befor the lord, six cover wagons, and
twelv oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox:
and they brought them befor the tabernacle.

7:4 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:5 take it of them, that
they may be to do the servic of the tabernacl of the congregation;
and thou shalt give them unto the levites, to everi man accord to
hi service.

7:6 and mose took the wagon and the oxen, and gave them unto the
levites.

7:7 two wagon and four oxen he gave unto the son of gershon,
accord to their service: 7:8 and four wagon and eight oxen he gave
unto the son of merari, accord unto their service, under the hand
of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

7:9 but unto the son of kohath he gave none: becaus the servic of
th sanctuari belong unto them wa that they should bear upon their
shoulders.

7:10 and the princ offer for dedic of the altar in the day
that it wa anointed, even the princ offer their offer before
th altar.

7:11 and the lord said unto moses, they shall offer their offering,
each princ on hi day, for the dedic of the altar.

7:12 and he that offer hi offer the first day wa nahshon the
son of amminadab, of the tribe of judah: 7:13 and hi offer wa one
silv charger, the weight thereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels,
on silver bowl of seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them were full of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat
offering: 7:14 one spoon of ten shekel of gold, full of incense: 7:15
one young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering: 7:16 one kid of the goat for a sin offering: 7:17 and for a
sacrific of peac offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five
lamb of the first year: thi wa the offer of nahshon the son of
amminadab.

7:18 On the second day nethaneel the son of zuar, princ of issachar,
did offer: 7:19 He offer for hi offer one silver charger, the
weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one silver bowl of
seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:20 one spoon of
gold of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:21 one young bullock, one ram,
on lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:22 one kid of the
goat for a sin offering: 7:23 and for a sacrific of peac offerings,
two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first year: this
wa the offer of nethaneel the son of zuar.

7:24 On the third day eliab the son of helon, princ of the children
of zebulun, did offer: 7:25 hi offer wa one silver charger, the
weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one silver bowl of
seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:26 one golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:27 one young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:28 one kid of
th goat for a sin offering: 7:29 and for a sacrific of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first
year: thi wa the offer of eliab the son of helon.

7:30 On the fourth day elizur the son of shedeur, princ of the
children of reuben, did offer: 7:31 hi offer wa one silver
charg of the weight of an hundr and thirti shekels, one silver
bowl of seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of
them full of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:32 one
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:33 one young bullock,
on ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:34 one
kid of the goat for a sin offering: 7:35 and for a sacrific of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first
year: thi wa the offer of elizur the son of shedeur.

7:36 On the fifth day shelumiel the son of zurishaddai, princ of the
children of simeon, did offer: 7:37 hi offer wa one silver
charger, the weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one
silv bowl of seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering:
7:38 one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:39 one young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:40 one kid of the goat for a sin offering: 7:41 and for a sacrifice
of peac offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of
th first year: thi wa the offer of shelumiel the son of
zurishaddai.

7:42 On the sixth day eliasaph the son of deuel, princ of the
children of gad, offered: 7:43 hi offer wa one silver charger of
th weight of an hundr and thirti shekels, a silver bowl of seventy
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:44 one golden spoon of
ten shekels, full of incense: 7:45 one young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:46 one kid of the
goat for a sin offering: 7:47 and for a sacrific of peac offerings,
two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first year: this
wa the offer of eliasaph the son of deuel.

7:48 On the seventh day elishama the son of ammihud, princ of the
children of ephraim, offered: 7:49 hi offer wa one silver
charger, the weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one
silv bowl of seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering:
7:50 one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:51 one young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:52 one kid of the goat for a sin offering: 7:53 and for a sacrifice
of peac offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of
th first year: thi wa the offer of elishama the son of ammihud.

7:54 On the eighth day offer gamaliel the son of pedahzur, princ of
th children of manasseh: 7:55 hi offer wa one silver charger of
th weight of an hundr and thirti shekels, one silver bowl of
seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:56 one golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:57 one young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:58 one kid of
th goat for a sin offering: 7:59 and for a sacrific of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first
year: thi wa the offer of gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

7:60 On the ninth day abidan the son of gideoni, princ of the
children of benjamin, offered: 7:61 hi offer wa one silver
charger, the weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one
silv bowl of seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering:
7:62 one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:63 one young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:64 one kid of the goat for a sin offering: 7:65 and for a sacrifice
of peac offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of
th first year: thi wa the offer of abidan the son of gideoni.

7:66 On the tenth day ahiez the son of ammishaddai, princ of the
children of dan, offered: 7:67 hi offer wa one silver charger,
th weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one silver bowl
of seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
ful of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:68 one
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:69 one young bullock,
on ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:70 one
kid of the goat for a sin offering: 7:71 and for a sacrific of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first
year: thi wa the offer of ahiez the son of ammishaddai.

7:72 On the eleventh day pagiel the son of ocran, princ of the
children of asher, offered: 7:73 hi offer wa one silver charger,
th weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one silver bowl
of seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
ful of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:74 one
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:75 one young bullock,
on ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:76 one
kid of the goat for a sin offering: 7:77 and for a sacrific of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first
year: thi wa the offer of pagiel the son of ocran.

7:78 On the twelfth day ahira the son of enan, princ of the children
of naphtali, offered: 7:79 hi offer wa one silver charger, the
weight whereof wa an hundr and thirti shekels, one silver bowl of
seventi shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingl with oil for a meat offering: 7:80 one golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:81 one young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:82 one kid of
th goat for a sin offering: 7:83 and for a sacrific of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lamb of the first
year: thi wa the offer of ahira the son of enan.

7:84 thi wa the dedic of the altar, in the day when it was
anointed, by the princ of israel: twelv charger of silver, twelve
silv bowls, twelv spoon of gold: 7:85 each charger of silver
weigh an hundr and thirti shekels, each bowl seventy: all the
silv vessel weigh two thousand and four hundr shekels, after
th shekel of the sanctuary: 7:86 the golden spoon were twelve, full
of incense, weigh ten shekel apiece, after the shekel of the
sanctuary: all the gold of the spoon wa an hundr and twenty
shekels.

7:87 all the oxen for the burnt offer were twelv bullocks, the
ram twelve, the lamb of the first year twelve, with their meat
offering: and the kid of the goat for sin offer twelve.

7:88 and all the oxen for the sacrific of the peac offer were
twenti and four bullocks, the ram sixty, the he goat sixty, the
lamb of the first year sixty. thi wa the dedic of the altar,
aft that it wa anointed.

7:89 and when mose wa gone into the tabernacl of the congregation
to speak with him, then he heard the voic of one speak unto him
from off the merci seat that wa upon the ark of testimony, from
between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 speak unto aaron and
say unto him, when thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamp shall give
light over against the candlestick.

8:3 and aaron did so; he light the lamp thereof over against the
candlestick, as the lord command moses.

8:4 and thi work of the candlestick wa of beaten gold, unto the
shaft thereof, unto the flower thereof, wa beaten work: according
unto the pattern which the lord had shew moses, so he made the
candlestick.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:6 take the levit from
among the children of israel, and cleans them.

8:7 and thu shalt thou do unto them, to cleans them: sprinkl water
of purifi upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let
them wash their clothes, and so make themselv clean.

8:8 then let them take a young bullock with hi meat offering, even
fin flour mingl with oil, and anoth young bullock shalt thou take
for a sin offering.

8:9 and thou shalt bring the levit befor the tabernacl of the
congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembl of the children
of israel together: 8:10 and thou shalt bring the levit befor the
lord: and the children of israel shall put their hand upon the
levites: 8:11 and aaron shall offer the levit befor the lord for an
off of the children of israel, that they may execut the service
of the lord.

8:12 and the levit shall lay their hand upon the head of the
bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the
oth for a burnt offering, unto the lord, to make an aton for
th levites.

8:13 and thou shalt set the levit befor aaron, and befor hi sons,
and offer them for an offer unto the lord.

8:14 thu shalt thou separ the levit from among the children of
israel: and the levit shall be mine.

8:15 and after that shall the levit go in to do the servic of the
tabernacl of the congregation: and thou shalt cleans them, and offer
them for an offering.

8:16 for they are wholli given unto me from among the children of
israel; instead of such as open everi womb, even instead of the
firstborn of all the children of israel, have I taken them unto me.

8:17 for all the firstborn of the children of israel are mine, both
man and beast: on the day that I smote everi firstborn in the land of
egypt I sanctifi them for myself.

8:18 and I have taken the levit for all the firstborn of the
children of israel.

8:19 and I have given the levit as a gift to aaron and to hi sons
from among the children of israel, to do the servic of the children
of israel in the tabernacl of the congregation, and to make an
aton for the children of israel: that there be no plagu among
th children of israel, when the children of israel come nigh unto the
sanctuary.

8:20 and moses, and aaron, and all the congreg of the children of
israel, did to the levit accord unto all that the lord commanded
mos concern the levites, so did the children of israel unto them.

8:21 and the levit were purified, and they wash their clothes; and
aaron offer them as an offer befor the lord; and aaron made an
aton for them to cleans them.

8:22 and after that went the levit in to do their servic in the
tabernacl of the congreg befor aaron, and befor hi sons: as
th lord had command mose concern the levites, so did they unto
them.

8:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:24 thi is it that
belongeth unto the levites: from twenti and five year old and upward
they shall go in to wait upon the servic of the tabernacl of the
congregation: 8:25 and from the age of fifti year they shall cease
wait upon the servic thereof, and shall serv no more: 8:26 but
shal minist with their brethren in the tabernacl of the
congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. thu shalt
thou do unto the levit touch their charge.

9:1 and the lord spake unto mose in the wilder of sinai, in the
first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of
egypt, saying, 9:2 let the children of israel also keep the passover
at hi appoint season.

9:3 In the fourteenth day of thi month, at even, ye shall keep it in
hi appoint season: accord to all the rite of it, and according
to all the ceremoni thereof, shall ye keep it.

9:4 and mose spake unto the children of israel, that they should keep
th passover.

9:5 and they kept the passov on the fourteenth day of the first
month at even in the wilder of sinai: accord to all that the
lord command moses, so did the children of israel.

9:6 and there were certain men, who were defil by the dead bodi of a
man, that they could not keep the passov on that day: and they came
befor mose and befor aaron on that day: 9:7 and those men said unto
him, We are defil by the dead bodi of a man: wherefor are we kept
back, that we may not offer an offer of the lord in hi appointed
season among the children of israel?  9:8 and mose said unto them,
stand still, and I will hear what the lord will command concerning
you.

9:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 9:10 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, If ani man of you or of your posterity
shal be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar
off, yet he shall keep the passov unto the lord.

9:11 the fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep
it, and eat it with unleaven bread and bitter herbs.

9:12 they shall leav none of it unto the morning, nor break ani bone
of it: accord to all the ordin of the passov they shall keep
it.

9:13 but the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and
forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off
from among hi people: becaus he brought not the offer of the lord
in hi appoint season, that man shall bear hi sin.

9:14 and if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the
passov unto the lord; accord to the ordin of the passover,
and accord to the manner thereof, so shall he do: ye shall have one
ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that wa born in the
land.

9:15 and on the day that the tabernacl wa rear up the cloud
cov the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even
ther wa upon the tabernacl as it were the appear of fire, until
th morning.

9:16 So it wa alway: the cloud cover it by day, and the appearance
of fire by night.

9:17 and when the cloud wa taken up from the tabernacle, then after
that the children of israel journeyed: and in the place where the
cloud abode, there the children of israel pitch their tents.

9:18 At the command of the lord the children of israel journeyed,
and at the command of the lord they pitched: as long as the cloud
abod upon the tabernacl they rest in their tents.

9:19 and when the cloud tarri long upon the tabernacl mani days,
then the children of israel kept the charg of the lord, and journeyed
not.

9:20 and so it was, when the cloud wa a few day upon the tabernacle;
accord to the command of the lord they abod in their tents,
and accord to the command of the lord they journeyed.

9:21 and so it was, when the cloud abod from even unto the morning,
and that the cloud wa taken up in the morning, then they journeyed:
wheth it wa by day or by night that the cloud wa taken up, they
journeyed.

9:22 Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the
cloud tarri upon the tabernacle, remain thereon, the children of
israel abod in their tents, and journey not: but when it wa taken
up, they journeyed.

9:23 At the command of the lord they rest in the tents, and at
th command of the lord they journeyed: they kept the charg of
th lord, at the command of the lord by the hand of moses.

10:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 10:2 make thee two
trumpet of silver; of a whole piec shalt thou make them: that thou
mayest use them for the call of the assembly, and for the
journey of the camps.

10:3 and when they shall blow with them, all the assembl shall
assembl themselv to thee at the door of the tabernacl of the
congregation.

10:4 and if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which
ar head of the thousand of israel, shall gather themselv unto
thee.

10:5 when ye blow an alarm, then the camp that lie on the east parts
shal go forward.

10:6 when ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camp that lie on
th south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for
their journeys.

10:7 but when the congreg is to be gather together, ye shall
blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.

10:8 and the son of aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets;
and they shall be to you for an ordin for ever throughout your
generations.

10:9 and if ye go to war in your land against the enemi that
oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye
shal be rememb befor the lord your god, and ye shall be saved
from your enemies.

10:10 also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and
in the begin of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpet over
your burnt offerings, and over the sacrific of your peac offerings;
that they may be to you for a memori befor your god: I am the lord
your god.

10:11 and it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in
th second year, that the cloud wa taken up from off the tabernacle
of the testimony.

10:12 and the children of israel took their journey out of the
wild of sinai; and the cloud rest in the wilder of paran.

10:13 and they first took their journey accord to the commandment
of the lord by the hand of moses.

10:14 In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children
of judah accord to their armies: and over hi host wa nahshon the
son of amminadab.

10:15 and over the host of the tribe of the children of issachar was
nethaneel the son of zuar.

10:16 and over the host of the tribe of the children of zebulun was
eliab the son of helon.

10:17 and the tabernacl wa taken down; and the son of gershon and
th son of merari set forward, bear the tabernacle.

10:18 and the standard of the camp of reuben set forward accord to
their armies: and over hi host wa elizur the son of shedeur.

10:19 and over the host of the tribe of the children of simeon was
shelumiel the son of zurishaddai.

10:20 and over the host of the tribe of the children of gad was
eliasaph the son of deuel.

10:21 and the kohathit set forward, bear the sanctuary: and the
oth did set up the tabernacl against they came.

10:22 and the standard of the camp of the children of ephraim set
forward accord to their armies: and over hi host wa elishama the
son of ammihud.

10:23 and over the host of the tribe of the children of manasseh was
gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

10:24 and over the host of the tribe of the children of benjamin was
abidan the son of gideoni.

10:25 and the standard of the camp of the children of dan set forward,
which wa the rereward of all the camp throughout their hosts: and
ov hi host wa ahiez the son of ammishaddai.

10:26 and over the host of the tribe of the children of asher was
pagiel the son of ocran.

10:27 and over the host of the tribe of the children of naphtali was
ahira the son of enan.

10:28 thu were the journey of the children of israel accord to
their armies, when they set forward.

10:29 and mose said unto hobab, the son of raguel the midianite,
moses' father in law, We are journey unto the place of which the
lord said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee
good: for the lord hath spoken good concern israel.

10:30 and he said unto him, I will not go; but I will depart to mine
own land, and to my kindred.

10:31 and he said, leav us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou
knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to
u instead of eyes.

10:32 and it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what
good the lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.

10:33 and they depart from the mount of the lord three days'
journey: and the ark of the coven of the lord went befor them in
th three days' journey, to search out a rest place for them.

10:34 and the cloud of the lord wa upon them by day, when they went
out of the camp.

10:35 and it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that mose said,
ris up, lord, and let thine enemi be scattered; and let them that
hat thee flee befor thee.

10:36 and when it rested, he said, return, O lord, unto the many
thousand of israel.

11:1 and when the peopl complained, it displeas the lord: and the
lord heard it; and hi anger wa kindled; and the fire of the lord
burnt among them, and consum them that were in the uttermost parts
of the camp.

11:2 and the peopl cri unto moses; and when mose pray unto the
lord, the fire wa quenched.

11:3 and he call the name of the place taberah: becaus the fire of
th lord burnt among them.

11:4 and the mixt multitud that wa among them fell a lusting: and
th children of israel also wept again, and said, who shall give us
flesh to eat?  11:5 We rememb the fish, which we did eat in egypt
freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions,
and the garlick: 11:6 but now our soul is dri away: there is nothing
at all, besid thi manna, befor our eyes.

11:7 and the manna wa as coriand seed, and the colour thereof as
th colour of bdellium.

11:8 and the peopl went about, and gather it, and ground it in
mills, or beat it in a mortar, and bake it in pans, and made cake of
it: and the tast of it wa as the tast of fresh oil.

11:9 and when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell
upon it.

11:10 then mose heard the peopl weep throughout their families,
everi man in the door of hi tent: and the anger of the lord was
kindl greatly; mose also wa displeased.

11:11 and mose said unto the lord, wherefor hast thou afflict thy
servant? and wherefor have I not found favour in thi sight, that thou
layest the burden of all thi peopl upon me?  11:12 have I conceived
al thi people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto
me, carri them in thi bosom, as a nurs father beareth the sucking
child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?  11:13
whenc should I have flesh to give unto all thi people? for they weep
unto me, saying, give us flesh, that we may eat.

11:14 I am not abl to bear all thi peopl alone, becaus it is too
heavi for me.

11:15 and if thou deal thu with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of
hand, if I have found favour in thi sight; and let me not see my
wretchedness.

11:16 and the lord said unto moses, gather unto me seventi men of the
eld of israel, whom thou knowest to be the elder of the people,
and offic over them; and bring them unto the tabernacl of the
congregation, that they may stand there with thee.

11:17 and I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take
of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they
shal bear the burden of the peopl with thee, that thou bear it not
thyself alone.

11:18 and say thou unto the people, sanctifi yourselv against to
morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ear of the
lord, saying, who shall give us flesh to eat? for it wa well with us
in egypt: therefor the lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.

11:19 Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither
ten days, nor twenti days; 11:20 but even a whole month, until it come
out at your nostrils, and it be loathsom unto you: becaus that ye
hav despis the lord which is among you, and have wept befor him,
saying, whi came we forth out of egypt?  11:21 and mose said, the
people, among whom I am, are six hundr thousand footmen; and thou
hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.

11:22 shall the flock and the herd be slain for them, to suffice
them?  or shall all the fish of the sea be gather togeth for them,
to suffic them?  11:23 and the lord said unto moses, Is the lord's
hand wax short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to
pass unto thee or not.

11:24 and mose went out, and told the peopl the word of the lord,
and gather the seventi men of the elder of the people, and set them
round about the tabernacle.

11:25 and the lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took
of the spirit that wa upon him, and gave it unto the seventi elders:
and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rest upon them, they
prophesied, and did not cease.

11:26 but there remain two of the men in the camp, the name of the
on wa eldad, and the name of the other medad: and the spirit rested
upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out
unto the tabernacle: and they prophesi in the camp.

11:27 and there ran a young man, and told moses, and said, eldad and
medad do prophesi in the camp.

11:28 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of moses, one of his
young men, answer and said, My lord moses, forbid them.

11:29 and mose said unto him, enviest thou for my sake? would god
that all the lord' peopl were prophets, and that the lord would put
hi spirit upon them!  11:30 and mose gat him into the camp, he and
th elder of israel.

11:31 and there went forth a wind from the lord, and brought quails
from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's
journey on thi side, and as it were a day' journey on the other
side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubit high upon the
fac of the earth.

11:32 and the peopl stood up all that day, and all that night, and
al the next day, and they gather the quails: he that gather least
gath ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves
round about the camp.

11:33 and while the flesh wa yet between their teeth, ere it was
chewed, the wrath of the lord wa kindl against the people, and the
lord smote the peopl with a veri great plague.

11:34 and he call the name of that place kibrothhattaavah: because
ther they buri the peopl that lusted.

11:35 and the peopl journey from kibrothhattaavah unto hazeroth;
and abod at hazeroth.

12:1 and miriam and aaron spake against mose becaus of the ethiopian
woman whom he had married: for he had marri an ethiopian woman.

12:2 and they said, hath the lord inde spoken onli by moses? hath he
not spoken also by us? and the lord heard it.

12:3 (now the man mose wa veri meek, abov all the men which were
upon the face of the earth.)  12:4 and the lord spake suddenli unto
moses, and unto aaron, and unto miriam, come out ye three unto the
tabernacl of the congregation. and they three came out.

12:5 and the lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in
th door of the tabernacle, and call aaron and miriam: and they both
cam forth.

12:6 and he said, hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you,
i the lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream.

12:7 My servant mose is not so, who is faith in all mine house.

12:8 with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitud of the lord shall he behold:
wherefor then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant moses?
12:9 and the anger of the lord wa kindl against them; and he
departed.

12:10 and the cloud depart from off the tabernacle; and, behold,
miriam becam leprous, white as snow: and aaron look upon miriam,
and, behold, she wa leprous.

12:11 and aaron said unto moses, alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we
hav sinned.

12:12 let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of hi mother' womb.

12:13 and mose cri unto the lord, saying, heal her now, O god, i
beseech thee.

12:14 and the lord said unto moses, If her father had but spit in her
face, should she not be asham seven days? let her be shut out from
th camp seven days, and after that let her be receiv in again.

12:15 and miriam wa shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
journey not till miriam wa brought in again.

12:16 and afterward the peopl remov from hazeroth, and pitch in
th wilder of paran.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 send thou men, that
they may search the land of canaan, which I give unto the children of
israel: of everi tribe of their father shall ye send a man, everi one
a ruler among them.

13:3 and mose by the command of the lord sent them from the
wild of paran: all those men were head of the children of
israel.

13:4 and these were their names: of the tribe of reuben, shammua the
son of zaccur.

13:5 Of the tribe of simeon, shaphat the son of hori.

13:6 Of the tribe of judah, caleb the son of jephunneh.

13:7 Of the tribe of issachar, igal the son of joseph.

13:8 Of the tribe of ephraim, oshea the son of nun.

13:9 Of the tribe of benjamin, palti the son of raphu.

13:10 Of the tribe of zebulun, gaddiel the son of sodi.

13:11 Of the tribe of joseph, namely, of the tribe of manasseh, gaddi
th son of susi.

13:12 Of the tribe of dan, ammiel the son of gemalli.

13:13 Of the tribe of asher, sethur the son of michael.

13:14 Of the tribe of naphtali, nahbi the son of vophsi.

13:15 Of the tribe of gad, geuel the son of machi.

13:16 these are the name of the men which mose sent to spi out the
land.

and mose call oshea the son of nun jehoshua.

13:17 and mose sent them to spi out the land of canaan, and said unto
them, get you up thi way southward, and go up into the mountain:
13:18 and see the land, what it is, and the peopl that dwelleth
therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many; 13:19 and what
th land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what
citi they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong
holds; 13:20 and what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether
ther be wood therein, or not. and be ye of good courage, and bring of
th fruit of the land. now the time wa the time of the firstripe
grapes.

13:21 So they went up, and search the land from the wilder of
zin unto rehob, as men come to hamath.

13:22 and they ascend by the south, and came unto hebron; where
ahiman, sheshai, and talmai, the children of anak, were. (now hebron
wa built seven year befor zoan in egypt.)  13:23 and they came unto
th brook of eshcol, and cut down from thenc a branch with one
clust of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they
brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.

13:24 the place wa call the brook eshcol, becaus of the cluster of
grap which the children of israel cut down from thence.

13:25 and they return from search of the land after forti days.

13:26 and they went and came to moses, and to aaron, and to all the
congreg of the children of israel, unto the wilder of paran,
to kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the
congregation, and shew them the fruit of the land.

13:27 and they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou
sentest us, and sure it floweth with milk and honey; and thi is the
fruit of it.

13:28 nevertheless the peopl be strong that dwell in the land, and
th citi are walled, and veri great: and moreov we saw the
children of anak there.

13:29 the amalekit dwell in the land of the south: and the hittites,
and the jebusites, and the amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the
canaanit dwell by the sea, and by the coast of jordan.

13:30 and caleb still the peopl befor moses, and said, let us go
up at once, and possess it; for we are well abl to overcom it.

13:31 but the men that went up with him said, We be not abl to go up
against the people; for they are stronger than we.

13:32 and they brought up an evil report of the land which they had
search unto the children of israel, saying, the land, through which
w have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants
thereof; and all the peopl that we saw in it are men of a great
stature.

13:33 and there we saw the giants, the son of anak, which come of the
giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight.

14:1 and all the congreg lift up their voice, and cried; and
th peopl wept that night.

14:2 and all the children of israel murmur against mose and against
aaron: and the whole congreg said unto them, would god that we
had die in the land of egypt! or would god we had die in this
wilderness!  14:3 and wherefor hath the lord brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wive and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into egypt?  14:4 and they
said one to another, let us make a captain, and let us return into
egypt.

14:5 then mose and aaron fell on their face befor all the assembly
of the congreg of the children of israel.

14:6 and joshua the son of nun, and caleb the son of jephunneh, which
wer of them that search the land, rent their clothes: 14:7 and they
spak unto all the compani of the children of israel, saying, the
land, which we pass through to search it, is an exceed good land.

14:8 If the lord delight in us, then he will bring us into thi land,
and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.

14:9 onli rebel not ye against the lord, neither fear ye the peopl of
th land; for they are bread for us: their defenc is depart from
them, and the lord is with us: fear them not.

14:10 but all the congreg bade stone them with stones. and the
glori of the lord appear in the tabernacl of the congregation
befor all the children of israel.

14:11 and the lord said unto moses, how long will thi peopl provoke
me?  and how long will it be ere they believ me, for all the signs
which I have shew among them?  14:12 I will smite them with the
pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater
n and mightier than they.

14:13 and mose said unto the lord, then the egyptian shall hear it,
(for thou broughtest up thi peopl in thi might from among them;)
14:14 and they will tell it to the inhabit of thi land: for they
hav heard that thou lord art among thi people, that thou lord art
seen face to face, and that thi cloud standeth over them, and that
thou goest befor them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a
pillar of fire by night.

14:15 now if thou shalt kill all thi peopl as one man, then the
nat which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, 14:16
becaus the lord wa not abl to bring thi peopl into the land which
h sware unto them, therefor he hath slain them in the wilderness.

14:17 and now, I beseech thee, let the power of my lord be great,
accord as thou hast spoken, saying, 14:18 the lord is
longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiv iniqu and
transgression, and by no mean clear the guilty, visit the
iniqu of the father upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation.

14:19 pardon, I beseech thee, the iniqu of thi peopl according
unto the great of thi mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this
people, from egypt even until now.

14:20 and the lord said, I have pardon accord to thi word: 14:21
but as truli as I live, all the earth shall be fill with the glory
of the lord.

14:22 becaus all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles,
which I did in egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempt me now
thes ten times, and have not hearken to my voice; 14:23 sure they
shal not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall
ani of them that provok me see it: 14:24 but my servant caleb,
becaus he had anoth spirit with him, and hath follow me fully,
him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and hi seed shall
possess it.

14:25 (now the amalekit and the canaanit dwelt in the valley.)
tomorrow turn you, and get you into the wilder by the way of the
r sea.

14:26 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron, saying, 14:27 how
long shall I bear with thi evil congregation, which murmur against
me? I have heard the murmur of the children of israel, which they
murmur against me.

14:28 say unto them, As truli as I live, saith the lord, as ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you: 14:29 your carcas shall
fal in thi wilderness; and all that were number of you, according
to your whole number, from twenti year old and upward which have
murmur against me.

14:30 doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concern which i
swar to make you dwell therein, save caleb the son of jephunneh, and
joshua the son of nun.

14:31 but your littl ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will
i bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.

14:32 but as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this
wilderness.

14:33 and your children shall wander in the wilder forti years,
and bear your whoredoms, until your carcas be wast in the
wilderness.

14:34 after the number of the day in which ye search the land, even
forti days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
forti years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.

14:35 I the lord have said, I will sure do it unto all thi evil
congregation, that are gather togeth against me: in this
wild they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

14:36 and the men, which mose sent to search the land, who returned,
and made all the congreg to murmur against him, by bring up a
sland upon the land, 14:37 even those men that did bring up the evil
report upon the land, die by the plagu befor the lord.

14:38 but joshua the son of nun, and caleb the son of jephunneh, which
wer of the men that went to search the land, live still.

14:39 and mose told these say unto all the children of israel:
and the peopl mourn greatly.

14:40 and they rose up earli in the morning, and gat them up into the
top of the mountain, saying, lo, we be here, and will go up unto the
plac which the lord hath promised: for we have sinned.

14:41 and mose said, wherefor now do ye transgress the commandment
of the lord? but it shall not prosper.

14:42 Go not up, for the lord is not among you; that ye be not smitten
befor your enemies.

14:43 for the amalekit and the canaanit are there befor you, and
y shall fall by the sword: becaus ye are turn away from the lord,
therefor the lord will not be with you.

14:44 but they presum to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the
ark of the coven of the lord, and moses, depart not out of the
camp.

14:45 then the amalekit came down, and the canaanit which dwelt in
that hill, and smote them, and discomfit them, even unto hormah.

15:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come into the land
of your habitations, which I give unto you, 15:3 and will make an
off by fire unto the lord, a burnt offering, or a sacrific in
perform a vow, or in a freewil offering, or in your solemn feasts,
to make a sweet savour unto the lord, of the herd or of the flock:
15:4 then shall he that offereth hi offer unto the lord bring a
meat offer of a tenth deal of flour mingl with the fourth part of
an hin of oil.

15:5 and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offer shalt
thou prepar with the burnt offer or sacrifice, for one lamb.

15:6 Or for a ram, thou shalt prepar for a meat offer two tenth
deal of flour mingl with the third part of an hin of oil.

15:7 and for a drink offer thou shalt offer the third part of an
hin of wine, for a sweet savour unto the lord.

15:8 and when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a
sacrific in perform a vow, or peac offer unto the lord: 15:9
then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offer of three tenth
deal of flour mingl with half an hin of oil.

15:10 and thou shalt bring for a drink offer half an hin of wine,
for an offer made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

15:11 thu shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a
lamb, or a kid.

15:12 accord to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to
everi one accord to their number.

15:13 all that are born of the countri shall do these thing after
thi manner, in offer an offer made by fire, of a sweet savour
unto the lord.

15:14 and if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoev be among you in
your generations, and will offer an offer made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the lord; as ye do, so he shall do.

15:15 one ordin shall be both for you of the congregation, and
also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordin for ever
in your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be befor the
lord.

15:16 one law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you.

15:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:18 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the land
whith I bring you, 15:19 then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the
bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heav offer unto the lord.

15:20 Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave
offering: as ye do the heav offer of the threshingfloor, so shall
y heav it.

15:21 Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the lord an heave
off in your generations.

15:22 and if ye have erred, and not observ all these commandments,
which the lord hath spoken unto moses, 15:23 even all that the lord
hath command you by the hand of moses, from the day that the lord
command moses, and henceforward among your generations; 15:24 then
it shall be, if ought be commit by ignor without the knowledge
of the congregation, that all the congreg shall offer one young
bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the lord, with
hi meat offering, and hi drink offering, accord to the manner,
and one kid of the goat for a sin offering.

15:25 and the priest shall make an aton for all the congregation
of the children of israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is
ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrific made by
fir unto the lord, and their sin offer befor the lord, for their
ignorance: 15:26 and it shall be forgiven all the congreg of the
children of israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them;
se all the peopl were in ignorance.

15:27 and if ani soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she
goat of the first year for a sin offering.

15:28 and the priest shall make an aton for the soul that sinneth
ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignor befor the lord, to make an
aton for him; and it shall be forgiven him.

15:29 Ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance,
both for him that is born among the children of israel, and for the
strang that sojourneth among them.

15:30 but the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the lord; and that
soul shall be cut off from among hi people.

15:31 becaus he hath despis the word of the lord, and hath broken
hi commandment, that soul shall utterli be cut off; hi iniquity
shal be upon him.

15:32 and while the children of israel were in the wilderness, they
found a man that gather stick upon the sabbath day.

15:33 and they that found him gather stick brought him unto moses
and aaron, and unto all the congregation.

15:34 and they put him in ward, becaus it wa not declar what
should be done to him.

15:35 and the lord said unto moses, the man shall be sure put to
death: all the congreg shall stone him with stone without the
camp.

15:36 and all the congreg brought him without the camp, and
ston him with stones, and he died; as the lord command moses.

15:37 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:38 speak unto the
children of israel, and bid them that they make them fring in the
bord of their garment throughout their generations, and that they
put upon the fring of the border a ribband of blue: 15:39 and it
shal be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember
al the command of the lord, and do them; and that ye seek not
aft your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a
whoring: 15:40 that ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and
b holi unto your god.

15:41 I am the lord your god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt, to be your god: I am the lord your god.

16:1 now korah, the son of izhar, the son of kohath, the son of levi,
and dathan and abiram, the son of eliab, and on, the son of peleth,
son of reuben, took men: 16:2 and they rose up befor moses, with
certain of the children of israel, two hundr and fifti princ of
th assembly, famou in the congregation, men of renown: 16:3 and they
gath themselv togeth against mose and against aaron, and said
unto them, Ye take too much upon you, see all the congreg are
holy, everi one of them, and the lord is among them: wherefor then
lift ye up yourselv abov the congreg of the lord?  16:4 and
when mose heard it, he fell upon hi face: 16:5 and he spake unto
korah and unto all hi company, saying, even to morrow the lord will
shew who are his, and who is holy; and will caus him to come near
unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he caus to come near unto
him.

16:6 thi do; take you censers, korah, and all hi company; 16:7 and
put fire therein, and put incens in them befor the lord to morrow:
and it shall be that the man whom the lord doth choose, he shall be
holy: ye take too much upon you, ye son of levi.

16:8 and mose said unto korah, hear, I pray you, ye son of levi:
16:9 seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the god of israel
hath separ you from the congreg of israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the servic of the tabernacl of the lord, and to
stand befor the congreg to minist unto them?  16:10 and he
hath brought thee near to him, and all thi brethren the son of levi
with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?  16:11 for which cause
both thou and all thi compani are gather togeth against the lord:
and what is aaron, that ye murmur against him?  16:12 and mose sent
to call dathan and abiram, the son of eliab: which said, We will not
com up: 16:13 Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of
a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
except thou make thyself altogeth a princ over us?  16:14 moreover
th hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey,
or given us inherit of field and vineyards: wilt thou put out the
ey of these men? we will not come up.

16:15 and mose wa veri wroth, and said unto the lord, respect not
thou their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have
i hurt one of them.

16:16 and mose said unto korah, Be thou and all thi compani before
th lord, thou, and they, and aaron, to morrow: 16:17 and take every
man hi censer, and put incens in them, and bring ye befor the lord
everi man hi censer, two hundr and fifti censers; thou also, and
aaron, each of you hi censer.

16:18 and they took everi man hi censer, and put fire in them, and
laid incens thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacl of the
congreg with mose and aaron.

16:19 and korah gather all the congreg against them unto the
door of the tabernacl of the congregation: and the glori of the lord
appear unto all the congregation.

16:20 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron, saying, 16:21
separ yourselv from among thi congregation, that I may consume
them in a moment.

16:22 and they fell upon their faces, and said, O god, the god of the
spirit of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with
al the congregation?  16:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying,
16:24 speak unto the congregation, saying, get you up from about the
tabernacl of korah, dathan, and abiram.

16:25 and mose rose up and went unto dathan and abiram; and the
eld of israel follow him.

16:26 and he spake unto the congregation, saying, depart, I pray you,
from the tent of these wick men, and touch noth of their's, lest
y be consum in all their sins.

16:27 So they gat up from the tabernacl of korah, dathan, and abiram,
on everi side: and dathan and abiram came out, and stood in the door
of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little
children.

16:28 and mose said, herebi ye shall know that the lord hath sent me
to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind.

16:29 If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be
visit after the visit of all men; then the lord hath not sent
me.

16:30 but if the lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go
down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have
provok the lord.

16:31 and it came to pass, as he had made an end of speak all these
words, that the ground clave asund that wa under them: 16:32 and
th earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, and their houses,
and all the men that appertain unto korah, and all their goods.

16:33 they, and all that appertain to them, went down aliv into the
pit, and the earth close upon them: and they perish from among the
congregation.

16:34 and all israel that were round about them fled at the cri of
them: for they said, lest the earth swallow us up also.

16:35 and there came out a fire from the lord, and consum the two
hundr and fifti men that offer incense.

16:36 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:37 speak unto eleazar
th son of aaron the priest, that he take up the censer out of the
burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.

16:38 the censer of these sinner against their own souls, let them
mak them broad plate for a cover of the altar: for they offered
them befor the lord, therefor they are hallowed: and they shall be a
sign unto the children of israel.

16:39 and eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they
that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plate for a
cov of the altar: 16:40 To be a memori unto the children of
israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of aaron, come near
to offer incens befor the lord; that he be not as korah, and as his
company: as the lord said to him by the hand of moses.

16:41 but on the morrow all the congreg of the children of israel
murmur against mose and against aaron, saying, Ye have kill the
peopl of the lord.

16:42 and it came to pass, when the congreg wa gather against
mos and against aaron, that they look toward the tabernacl of the
congregation: and, behold, the cloud cover it, and the glori of the
lord appeared.

16:43 and mose and aaron came befor the tabernacl of the
congregation.

16:44 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:45 get you up from
among thi congregation, that I may consum them as in a moment. and
they fell upon their faces.

16:46 and mose said unto aaron, take a censer, and put fire therein
from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickli unto the
congregation, and make an aton for them: for there is wrath gone
out from the lord; the plagu is begun.

16:47 and aaron took as mose commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation; and, behold, the plagu wa begun among the people: and
h put on incense, and made an aton for the people.

16:48 and he stood between the dead and the living; and the plagu was
stayed.

16:49 now they that die in the plagu were fourteen thousand and
seven hundred, besid them that die about the matter of korah.

16:50 and aaron return unto mose unto the door of the tabernacl of
th congregation: and the plagu wa stayed.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and take of everi one of them a rod accord to
th hous of their fathers, of all their princ accord to the
hous of their father twelv rods: write thou everi man' name upon
hi rod.

17:3 and thou shalt write aaron' name upon the rod of levi: for one
rod shall be for the head of the hous of their fathers.

17:4 and thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacl of the congregation
befor the testimony, where I will meet with you.

17:5 and it shall come to pass, that the man' rod, whom I shall
choose, shall blossom: and I will make to ceas from me the murmurings
of the children of israel, wherebi they murmur against you.

17:6 and mose spake unto the children of israel, and everi one of
their princ gave him a rod apiece, for each princ one, accord to
their fathers' houses, even twelv rods: and the rod of aaron was
among their rods.

17:7 and mose laid up the rod befor the lord in the tabernacl of
witness.

17:8 and it came to pass, that on the morrow mose went into the
tabernacl of witness; and, behold, the rod of aaron for the hous of
levi wa budded, and brought forth buds, and bloom blossoms, and
yield almonds.

17:9 and mose brought out all the rod from befor the lord unto all
th children of israel: and they looked, and took everi man hi rod.

17:10 and the lord said unto moses, bring aaron' rod again befor the
testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt
quit take away their murmur from me, that they die not.

17:11 and mose did so: as the lord command him, so did he.

17:12 and the children of israel spake unto moses, saying, behold, we
die, we perish, we all perish.

17:13 whosoev cometh ani thing near unto the tabernacl of the lord
shal die: shall we be consum with dying?  18:1 and the lord said
unto aaron, thou and thi son and thi father' hous with thee shall
bear the iniqu of the sanctuary: and thou and thi son with thee
shal bear the iniqu of your priesthood.

18:2 and thi brethren also of the tribe of levi, the tribe of thy
father, bring thou with thee, that they may be join unto thee, and
minist unto thee: but thou and thi son with thee shall minister
befor the tabernacl of witness.

18:3 and they shall keep thi charge, and the charg of all the
tabernacle: onli they shall not come nigh the vessel of the sanctuary
and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.

18:4 and they shall be join unto thee, and keep the charg of the
tabernacl of the congregation, for all the servic of the tabernacle:
and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.

18:5 and ye shall keep the charg of the sanctuary, and the charg of
th altar: that there be no wrath ani more upon the children of
israel.

18:6 and I, behold, I have taken your brethren the levit from among
th children of israel: to you they are given as a gift for the lord,
to do the servic of the tabernacl of the congregation.

18:7 therefor thou and thi son with thee shall keep your priest's
offic for everyth of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall
serve: I have given your priest' offic unto you as a servic of
gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

18:8 and the lord spake unto aaron, behold, I also have given thee the
charg of mine heav offer of all the hallow thing of the
children of israel; unto thee have I given them by reason of the
anointing, and to thi sons, by an ordin for ever.

18:9 thi shall be thine of the most holi things, reserv from the
fire: everi oblat of theirs, everi meat offer of theirs, and
everi sin offer of theirs, and everi trespass offer of theirs
which they shall render unto me, shall be most holi for thee and for
thi sons.

18:10 In the most holi place shalt thou eat it; everi male shall eat
it: it shall be holi unto thee.

18:11 and thi is thine; the heav offer of their gift, with all
th wave offer of the children of israel: I have given them unto
thee, and to thi son and to thi daughter with thee, by a statut for
ever: everi one that is clean in thi hous shall eat of it.

18:12 all the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of
th wheat, the firstfruit of them which they shall offer unto the
lord, them have I given thee.

18:13 and whatsoev is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring
unto the lord, shall be thine; everi one that is clean in thine house
shal eat of it.

18:14 everi thing devot in israel shall be thine.

18:15 everi thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they
br unto the lord, whether it be of men or beasts, shall be thine:
nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou sure redeem, and the
firstl of unclean beast shalt thou redeem.

18:16 and those that are to be redeem from a month old shalt thou
redeem, accord to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels,
aft the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenti gerahs.

18:17 but the firstl of a cow, or the firstl of a sheep, or the
firstl of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt
sprinkl their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an
off made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the lord.

18:18 and the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as
th right shoulder are thine.

18:19 all the heav offer of the holi things, which the children
of israel offer unto the lord, have I given thee, and thi son and thy
daught with thee, by a statut for ever: it is a coven of salt
for ever befor the lord unto thee and to thi seed with thee.

18:20 and the lord spake unto aaron, thou shalt have no inherit in
their land, neither shalt thou have ani part among them: I am thi part
and thine inherit among the children of israel.

18:21 and, behold, I have given the children of levi all the tenth in
israel for an inheritance, for their servic which they serve, even
th servic of the tabernacl of the congregation.

18:22 neither must the children of israel henceforth come nigh the
tabernacl of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.

18:23 but the levit shall do the servic of the tabernacl of the
congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a
statut for ever throughout your generations, that among the children
of israel they have no inheritance.

18:24 but the tith of the children of israel, which they offer as an
heav offer unto the lord, I have given to the levit to inherit:
therefor I have said unto them, among the children of israel they
shal have no inheritance.

18:25 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 18:26 thu speak unto the
levites, and say unto them, when ye take of the children of israel the
tith which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye
shal offer up an heav offer of it for the lord, even a tenth part
of the tithe.

18:27 and thi your heav offer shall be reckon unto you, as
though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the ful of
th winepress.

18:28 thu ye also shall offer an heav offer unto the lord of all
your tithes, which ye receiv of the children of israel; and ye shall
giv thereof the lord' heav offer to aaron the priest.

18:29 out of all your gift ye shall offer everi heav offer of the
lord, of all the best thereof, even the hallow part thereof out of
it.

18:30 therefor thou shalt say unto them, when ye have heav the best
thereof from it, then it shall be count unto the levit as the
increas of the threshingfloor, and as the increas of the winepress.

18:31 and ye shall eat it in everi place, ye and your households: for
it is your reward for your servic in the tabernacl of the
congregation.

18:32 and ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved
from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollut the holi thing of
th children of israel, lest ye die.

19:1 and the lord spake unto mose and unto aaron, saying, 19:2 this
i the ordin of the law which the lord hath commanded, saying,
speak unto the children of israel, that they bring thee a red heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:
19:3 and ye shall give her unto eleazar the priest, that he may bring
her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her befor hi face:
19:4 and eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with hi finger,
and sprinkl of her blood directli befor the tabernacl of the
congreg seven times: 19:5 and one shall burn the heifer in his
sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he
burn: 19:6 and the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and
scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burn of the heifer.

19:7 then the priest shall wash hi clothes, and he shall bath his
flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the
priest shall be unclean until the even.

19:8 and he that burneth her shall wash hi cloth in water, and
bath hi flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.

19:9 and a man that is clean shall gather up the ash of the heifer,
and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be
kept for the congreg of the children of israel for a water of
separation: it is a purif for sin.

19:10 and he that gathereth the ash of the heifer shall wash his
clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the
children of israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them,
for a statut for ever.

19:11 He that toucheth the dead bodi of ani man shall be unclean seven
days.

19:12 He shall purifi himself with it on the third day, and on the
seventh day he shall be clean: but if he purifi not himself the third
day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.

19:13 whosoev toucheth the dead bodi of ani man that is dead, and
purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacl of the lord; and that
soul shall be cut off from israel: becaus the water of separ was
not sprinkl upon him, he shall be unclean; hi unclean is yet
upon him.

19:14 thi is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into
th tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.

19:15 and everi open vessel, which hath no cover bound upon it, is
unclean.

19:16 and whosoev toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the
open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be
unclean seven days.

19:17 and for an unclean person they shall take of the ash of the
burnt heifer of purif for sin, and run water shall be put
thereto in a vessel: 19:18 and a clean person shall take hyssop, and
dip it in the water, and sprinkl it upon the tent, and upon all the
vessels, and upon the person that were there, and upon him that
touch a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave: 19:19 and the
clean person shall sprinkl upon the unclean on the third day, and on
th seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purifi himself, and
wash hi clothes, and bath himself in water, and shall be clean at
even.

19:20 but the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purifi himself,
that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, becaus he
hath defil the sanctuari of the lord: the water of separ hath
not been sprinkl upon him; he is unclean.

19:21 and it shall be a perpetu statut unto them, that he that
sprinkleth the water of separ shall wash hi clothes; and he that
toucheth the water of separ shall be unclean until even.

19:22 and whatsoev the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and
th soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.

20:1 then came the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
into the desert of zin in the first month: and the peopl abod in
kadesh; and miriam die there, and wa buri there.

20:2 and there wa no water for the congregation: and they gathered
themselv togeth against mose and against aaron.

20:3 and the peopl chode with moses, and spake, saying, would god
that we had die when our brethren die befor the lord!  20:4 and why
hav ye brought up the congreg of the lord into thi wilderness,
that we and our cattl should die there?  20:5 and wherefor have ye
mad us to come up out of egypt, to bring us in unto thi evil place?
it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;
neith is there ani water to drink.

20:6 and mose and aaron went from the presenc of the assembl unto
th door of the tabernacl of the congregation, and they fell upon
their faces: and the glori of the lord appear unto them.

20:7 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 20:8 take the rod, and
gath thou the assembl together, thou, and aaron thi brother, and
speak ye unto the rock befor their eyes; and it shall give forth his
water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so
thou shalt give the congreg and their beast drink.

20:9 and mose took the rod from befor the lord, as he command him.

20:10 and mose and aaron gather the congreg togeth before
th rock, and he said unto them, hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch
you water out of thi rock?  20:11 and mose lift up hi hand, and
with hi rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out
abundantly, and the congreg drank, and their beast also.

20:12 and the lord spake unto mose and aaron, becaus ye believ me
not, to sanctifi me in the eye of the children of israel, therefore
y shall not bring thi congreg into the land which I have given
them.

20:13 thi is the water of meribah; becaus the children of israel
strov with the lord, and he wa sanctifi in them.

20:14 and mose sent messeng from kadesh unto the king of edom,
thu saith thi brother israel, thou knowest all the travail that hath
befallen us: 20:15 how our father went down into egypt, and we have
dwelt in egypt a long time; and the egyptian vex us, and our
fathers: 20:16 and when we cri unto the lord, he heard our voice,
and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of egypt: and,
behold, we are in kadesh, a citi in the uttermost of thi border: 20:17
let us pass, I pray thee, through thi country: we will not pass
through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of
th water of the wells: we will go by the king' high way, we will not
turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have pass thy
borders.

20:18 and edom said unto him, thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come
out against thee with the sword.

20:19 and the children of israel said unto him, We will go by the high
way: and if I and my cattl drink of thi water, then I will pay for
it: I will only, without do anyth else, go through on my feet.

20:20 and he said, thou shalt not go through. and edom came out
against him with much people, and with a strong hand.

20:21 thu edom refus to give israel passag through hi border:
wherefor israel turn away from him.

20:22 and the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
journey from kadesh, and came unto mount hor.

20:23 and the lord spake unto mose and aaron in mount hor, by the
coast of the land of edom, saying, 20:24 aaron shall be gather unto
hi people: for he shall not enter into the land which I have given
unto the children of israel, becaus ye rebel against my word at
th water of meribah.

20:25 take aaron and eleazar hi son, and bring them up unto mount
hor: 20:26 and strip aaron of hi garments, and put them upon eleazar
hi son: and aaron shall be gather unto hi people, and shall die
there.

20:27 and mose did as the lord commanded: and they went up into mount
hor in the sight of all the congregation.

20:28 and mose strip aaron of hi garments, and put them upon
eleazar hi son; and aaron die there in the top of the mount: and
mos and eleazar came down from the mount.

20:29 and when all the congreg saw that aaron wa dead, they
mourn for aaron thirti days, even all the hous of israel.

21:1 and when king arad the canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard
tel that israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against
israel, and took some of them prisoners.

21:2 and israel vow a vow unto the lord, and said, If thou wilt
inde deliv thi peopl into my hand, then I will utterli destroy
their cities.

21:3 and the lord hearken to the voic of israel, and deliv up
th canaanites; and they utterli destroy them and their cities: and
h call the name of the place hormah.

21:4 and they journey from mount hor by the way of the red sea, to
compass the land of edom: and the soul of the peopl wa much
discourag becaus of the way.

21:5 and the peopl spake against god, and against moses, wherefore
hav ye brought us up out of egypt to die in the wilderness? for there
i no bread, neither is there ani water; and our soul loatheth this
light bread.

21:6 and the lord sent fieri serpent among the people, and they bit
th people; and much peopl of israel died.

21:7 therefor the peopl came to moses, and said, We have sinned, for
w have spoken against the lord, and against thee; pray unto the lord,
that he take away the serpent from us. and mose pray for the
people.

21:8 and the lord said unto moses, make thee a fieri serpent, and set
it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that everi one that is
bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.

21:9 and mose made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it
cam to pass, that if a serpent had bitten ani man, when he beheld the
serp of brass, he lived.

21:10 and the children of israel set forward, and pitch in oboth.

21:11 and they journey from oboth, and pitch at ijeabarim, in the
wild which is befor moab, toward the sunrising.

21:12 from thenc they removed, and pitch in the valley of zared.

21:13 from thenc they removed, and pitch on the other side of
arnon, which is in the wilder that cometh out of the coast of the
amorites: for arnon is the border of moab, between moab and the
amorites.

21:14 wherefor it is said in the book of the war of the lord, what
h did in the red sea, and in the brook of arnon, 21:15 and at the
stream of the brook that goeth down to the dwell of ar, and lieth
upon the border of moab.

21:16 and from thenc they went to beer: that is the well whereof the
lord spake unto moses, gather the peopl together, and I will give
them water.

21:17 then israel sang thi song, spring up, O well; sing ye unto it:
21:18 the princ dig the well, the nobl of the peopl dig it,
bi the direct of the lawgiver, with their staves. and from the
wild they went to mattanah: 21:19 and from mattanah to nahaliel:
and from nahaliel to bamoth: 21:20 and from bamoth in the valley, that
i in the countri of moab, to the top of pisgah, which looketh toward
jeshimon.

21:21 and israel sent messeng unto sihon king of the amorites,
saying, 21:22 let me pass through thi land: we will not turn into the
fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink of the water of the
well: but we will go along by the king' high way, until we be past
thi borders.

21:23 and sihon would not suffer israel to pass through hi border:
but sihon gather all hi peopl together, and went out against
israel into the wilderness: and he came to jahaz, and fought against
israel.

21:24 and israel smote him with the edg of the sword, and possessed
hi land from arnon unto jabbok, even unto the children of ammon: for
th border of the children of ammon wa strong.

21:25 and israel took all these cities: and israel dwelt in all the
citi of the amorites, in heshbon, and in all the villag thereof.

21:26 for heshbon wa the citi of sihon the king of the amorites, who
had fought against the former king of moab, and taken all hi land out
of hi hand, even unto arnon.

21:27 wherefor they that speak in proverb say, come into heshbon,
let the citi of sihon be built and prepared: 21:28 for there is a fire
gon out of heshbon, a flame from the citi of sihon: it hath consumed
ar of moab, and the lord of the high place of arnon.

21:29 woe to thee, moab! thou art undone, O peopl of chemosh: he hath
given hi son that escaped, and hi daughters, into captiv unto
sihon king of the amorites.

21:30 We have shot at them; heshbon is perish even unto dibon, and
w have laid them wast even unto nophah, which reacheth unto medeba.

21:31 thu israel dwelt in the land of the amorites.

21:32 and mose sent to spi out jaazer, and they took the villages
thereof, and drove out the amorit that were there.

21:33 and they turn and went up by the way of bashan: and Og the
k of bashan went out against them, he, and all hi people, to the
battl at edrei.

21:34 and the lord said unto moses, fear him not: for I have delivered
him into thi hand, and all hi people, and hi land; and thou shalt do
to him as thou didst unto sihon king of the amorites, which dwelt at
heshbon.

21:35 So they smote him, and hi sons, and all hi people, until there
wa none left him alive: and they possess hi land.

22:1 and the children of israel set forward, and pitch in the plains
of moab on thi side jordan by jericho.

22:2 and balak the son of zippor saw all that israel had done to the
amorites.

22:3 and moab wa sore afraid of the people, becaus they were many:
and moab wa distress becaus of the children of israel.

22:4 and moab said unto the elder of midian, now shall thi company
lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of
th field.

and balak the son of zippor wa king of the moabit at that time.

22:5 He sent messeng therefor unto balaam the son of beor to
pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his
people, to call him, saying, behold, there is a peopl come out from
egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abid over
against me: 22:6 come now therefore, I pray thee, curs me this
people; for they are too mighti for me: peradventur I shall prevail,
that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land: for
i wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest
i cursed.

22:7 and the elder of moab and the elder of midian depart with the
reward of divin in their hand; and they came unto balaam, and
spak unto him the word of balak.

22:8 and he said unto them, lodg here thi night, and I will bring
you word again, as the lord shall speak unto me: and the princ of
moab abod with balaam.

22:9 and god came unto balaam, and said, what men are these with thee?
22:10 and balaam said unto god, balak the son of zippor, king of moab,
hath sent unto me, saying, 22:11 behold, there is a peopl come out of
egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curs me them;
peradventur I shall be abl to overcom them, and drive them out.

22:12 and god said unto balaam, thou shalt not go with them; thou
shalt not curs the people: for they are blessed.

22:13 and balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princ of
balak, get you into your land: for the lord refuseth to give me leave
to go with you.

22:14 and the princ of moab rose up, and they went unto balak, and
said, balaam refuseth to come with us.

22:15 and balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honour than
they.

22:16 and they came to balaam, and said to him, thu saith balak the
son of zippor, let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from come unto
me: 22:17 for I will promot thee unto veri great honour, and I will
do whatsoev thou sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse
m thi people.

22:18 and balaam answer and said unto the servant of balak, if
balak would give me hi hous full of silver and gold, I cannot go
beyond the word of the lord my god, to do less or more.

22:19 now therefore, I pray you, tarri ye also here thi night, that i
may know what the lord will say unto me more.

22:20 and god came unto balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men
com to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which i
shal say unto thee, that shalt thou do.

22:21 and balaam rose up in the morning, and saddl hi ass, and went
with the princ of moab.

22:22 and god' anger wa kindl becaus he went: and the angel of
th lord stood in the way for an adversari against him. now he was
rid upon hi ass, and hi two servant were with him.

22:23 and the ass saw the angel of the lord stand in the way, and
hi sword drawn in hi hand: and the ass turn asid out of the way,
and went into the field: and balaam smote the ass, to turn her into
th way.

22:24 but the angel of the lord stood in a path of the vineyards, a
wal be on thi side, and a wall on that side.

22:25 and when the ass saw the angel of the lord, she thrust herself
unto the wall, and crush balaam' foot against the wall: and he
smot her again.

22:26 and the angel of the lord went further, and stood in a narrow
place, where wa no way to turn either to the right hand or to the
left.

22:27 and when the ass saw the angel of the lord, she fell down under
balaam: and balaam' anger wa kindled, and he smote the ass with a
staff.

22:28 and the lord open the mouth of the ass, and she said unto
balaam, what have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these
thre times?  22:29 and balaam said unto the ass, becaus thou hast
mock me: I would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would i
kil thee.

22:30 and the ass said unto balaam, Am not I thine ass, upon which
thou hast ridden ever sinc I wa thine unto thi day? wa I ever wont
to do so unto thee? and he said, nay.

22:31 then the lord open the eye of balaam, and he saw the angel of
th lord stand in the way, and hi sword drawn in hi hand: and he
bow down hi head, and fell flat on hi face.

22:32 and the angel of the lord said unto him, wherefor hast thou
smitten thine ass these three times? behold, I went out to withstand
thee, becaus thi way is pervers befor me: 22:33 and the ass saw me,
and turn from me these three times: unless she had turn from me,
sur now also I had slain thee, and save her alive.

22:34 and balaam said unto the angel of the lord, I have sinned; for i
knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if
it displeas thee, I will get me back again.

22:35 and the angel of the lord said unto balaam, Go with the men: but
onli the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. so
balaam went with the princ of balak.

22:36 and when balak heard that balaam wa come, he went out to meet
him unto a citi of moab, which is in the border of arnon, which is in
th utmost coast.

22:37 and balak said unto balaam, did I not earnestli send unto thee
to call thee? wherefor camest thou not unto me? am I not abl indeed
to promot thee to honour?  22:38 and balaam said unto balak, lo, I am
com unto thee: have I now ani power at all to say ani thing? the word
that god putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.

22:39 and balaam went with balak, and they came unto kirjathhuzoth.

22:40 and balak offer oxen and sheep, and sent to balaam, and to the
princ that were with him.

22:41 and it came to pass on the morrow, that balak took balaam, and
brought him up into the high place of baal, that thenc he might see
th utmost part of the people.

23:1 and balaam said unto balak, build me here seven altars, and
prepar me here seven oxen and seven rams.

23:2 and balak did as balaam had spoken; and balak and balaam offered
on everi altar a bullock and a ram.

23:3 and balaam said unto balak, stand by thi burnt offering, and i
wil go: peradventur the lord will come to meet me: and whatsoev he
sheweth me I will tell thee. and he went to an high place.

23:4 and god met balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepar seven
altars, and I have offer upon everi altar a bullock and a ram.

23:5 and the lord put a word in balaam' mouth, and said, return unto
balak, and thu thou shalt speak.

23:6 and he return unto him, and, lo, he stood by hi burnt
sacrifice, he, and all the princ of moab.

23:7 and he took up hi parable, and said, balak the king of moab hath
brought me from aram, out of the mountain of the east, saying, come,
curs me jacob, and come, defi israel.

23:8 how shall I curse, whom god hath not cursed? or how shall I defy,
whom the lord hath not defied?  23:9 for from the top of the rock i
se him, and from the hill I behold him: lo, the peopl shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckon among the nations.

23:10 who can count the dust of jacob, and the number of the fourth
part of israel? let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his!  23:11 and balak said unto balaam, what hast thou
don unto me? I took thee to curs mine enemies, and, behold, thou
hast bless them altogether.

23:12 and he answer and said, must I not take heed to speak that
which the lord hath put in my mouth?  23:13 and balak said unto him,
come, I pray thee, with me unto anoth place, from whenc thou mayest
se them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not
se them all: and curs me them from thence.

23:14 and he brought him into the field of zophim, to the top of
pisgah, and built seven altars, and offer a bullock and a ram on
everi altar.

23:15 and he said unto balak, stand here by thi burnt offering, while
i meet the lord yonder.

23:16 and the lord met balaam, and put a word in hi mouth, and said,
go again unto balak, and say thus.

23:17 and when he came to him, behold, he stood by hi burnt offering,
and the princ of moab with him. and balak said unto him, what hath
th lord spoken?  23:18 and he took up hi parable, and said, rise up,
balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of zippor: 23:19 god is not
a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and
shal he not make it good?  23:20 behold, I have receiv commandment
to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot revers it.

23:21 He hath not beheld iniqu in jacob, neither hath he seen
pervers in israel: the lord hi god is with him, and the shout of
a king is among them.

23:22 god brought them out of egypt; he hath as it were the strength
of an unicorn.

23:23 sure there is no enchant against jacob, neither is there
ani divin against israel: accord to thi time it shall be said
of jacob and of israel, what hath god wrought!  23:24 behold, the
peopl shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young
lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the
blood of the slain.

23:25 and balak said unto balaam, neither curs them at all, nor bless
them at all.

23:26 but balaam answer and said unto balak, told not I thee,
saying, all that the lord speaketh, that I must do?  23:27 and balak
said unto balaam, come, I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another
place; peradventur it will pleas god that thou mayest curs me them
from thence.

23:28 and balak brought balaam unto the top of peor, that looketh
toward jeshimon.

23:29 and balaam said unto balak, build me here seven altars, and
prepar me here seven bullock and seven rams.

23:30 and balak did as balaam had said, and offer a bullock and a
ram on everi altar.

24:1 and when balaam saw that it pleas the lord to bless israel, he
went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his
fac toward the wilderness.

24:2 and balaam lift up hi eyes, and he saw israel abid in his
tent accord to their tribes; and the spirit of god came upon him.

24:3 and he took up hi parable, and said, balaam the son of beor hath
said, and the man whose eye are open hath said: 24:4 He hath said,
which heard the word of god, which saw the vision of the almighty,
fal into a trance, but have hi eye open: 24:5 how goodli are
thi tents, O jacob, and thi tabernacles, O israel!  24:6 As the
valley are they spread forth, as garden by the river' side, as the
tre of lign alo which the lord hath planted, and as cedar trees
besid the waters.

24:7 He shall pour the water out of hi buckets, and hi seed shall be
in mani waters, and hi king shall be higher than agag, and his
kingdom shall be exalted.

24:8 god brought him forth out of egypt; he hath as it were the
strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nation hi enemies, and
shal break their bones, and pierc them through with hi arrows.

24:9 He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall
stir him up? bless is he that blesseth thee, and curs is he that
curseth thee.

24:10 and balak' anger wa kindl against balaam, and he smote his
hand together: and balak said unto balaam, I call thee to curse
min enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogeth bless them these
thre times.

24:11 therefor now flee thou to thi place: I thought to promot thee
unto great honour; but, lo, the lord hath kept thee back from honour.

24:12 and balaam said unto balak, spake I not also to thi messengers
which thou sentest unto me, saying, 24:13 If balak would give me his
hous full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the command of
th lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the lord
saith, that will I speak?  24:14 and now, behold, I go unto my people:
com therefore, and I will advertis thee what thi peopl shall do to
thi peopl in the latter days.

24:15 and he took up hi parable, and said, balaam the son of beor
hath said, and the man whose eye are open hath said: 24:16 He hath
said, which heard the word of god, and knew the knowledg of the most
high, which saw the vision of the almighty, fall into a trance, but
hav hi eye open: 24:17 I shall see him, but not now: I shall
behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a star out of jacob, and a
sceptr shall rise out of israel, and shall smite the corner of moab,
and destroy all the children of sheth.

24:18 and edom shall be a possession, seir also shall be a possession
for hi enemies; and israel shall do valiantly.

24:19 out of jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall
destroy him that remaineth of the city.

24:20 and when he look on amalek, he took up hi parable, and said,
amalek wa the first of the nations; but hi latter end shall be that
h perish for ever.

24:21 and he look on the kenites, and took up hi parable, and said,
strong is thi dwellingplace, and thou puttest thi nest in a rock.

24:22 nevertheless the kenit shall be wasted, until asshur shall
carri thee away captive.

24:23 and he took up hi parable, and said, alas, who shall live when
god doeth this!  24:24 and ship shall come from the coast of chittim,
and shall afflict asshur, and shall afflict eber, and he also shall
perish for ever.

24:25 and balaam rose up, and went and return to hi place: and
balak also went hi way.

25:1 and israel abod in shittim, and the peopl began to commit
whoredom with the daughter of moab.

25:2 and they call the peopl unto the sacrific of their gods: and
th peopl did eat, and bow down to their gods.

25:3 and israel join himself unto baalpeor: and the anger of the
lord wa kindl against israel.

25:4 and the lord said unto moses, take all the head of the people,
and hang them up befor the lord against the sun, that the fierce
ang of the lord may be turn away from israel.

25:5 and mose said unto the judg of israel, slay ye everi one his
men that were join unto baalpeor.

25:6 and, behold, one of the children of israel came and brought unto
hi brethren a midianitish woman in the sight of moses, and in the
sight of all the congreg of the children of israel, who were
weep befor the door of the tabernacl of the congregation.

25:7 and when phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the
priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a
javelin in hi hand; 25:8 and he went after the man of israel into the
tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of israel, and the
woman through her belly. So the plagu wa stay from the children of
israel.

25:9 and those that die in the plagu were twenti and four thousand.

25:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:11 phinehas, the son
of eleazar, the son of aaron the priest, hath turn my wrath away
from the children of israel, while he wa zealou for my sake among
them, that I consum not the children of israel in my jealousy.

25:12 wherefor say, behold, I give unto him my coven of peace:
25:13 and he shall have it, and hi seed after him, even the covenant
of an everlast priesthood; becaus he wa zealou for hi god, and
mad an aton for the children of israel.

25:14 now the name of the israelit that wa slain, even that was
slain with the midianitish woman, wa zimri, the son of salu, a prince
of a chief hous among the simeonites.

25:15 and the name of the midianitish woman that wa slain wa cozbi,
th daughter of zur; he wa head over a people, and of a chief house
in midian.

25:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:17 vex the midianites,
and smite them: 25:18 for they vex you with their wiles, wherewith
they have beguil you in the matter of peor, and in the matter of
cozbi, the daughter of a princ of midian, their sister, which was
slain in the day of the plagu for peor' sake.

26:1 and it came to pass after the plague, that the lord spake unto
mos and unto eleazar the son of aaron the priest, saying, 26:2 take
th sum of all the congreg of the children of israel, from twenty
year old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that are
 to go to war in israel.

26:3 and mose and eleazar the priest spake with them in the plain of
moab by jordan near jericho, saying, 26:4 take the sum of the people,
from twenti year old and upward; as the lord command mose and the
children of israel, which went forth out of the land of egypt.

26:5 reuben, the eldest son of israel: the children of reuben; hanoch,
of whom cometh the famili of the hanochites: of pallu, the famili of
th palluites: 26:6 Of hezron, the famili of the hezronites: of carmi,
th famili of the carmites.

26:7 these are the famili of the reubenites: and they that were
numb of them were forti and three thousand and seven hundr and
thirty.

26:8 and the son of pallu; eliab.

26:9 and the son of eliab; nemuel, and dathan, and abiram. thi is
that dathan and abiram, which were famou in the congregation, who
strov against mose and against aaron in the compani of korah, when
they strove against the lord: 26:10 and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow them up togeth with korah, when that compani died,
what time the fire devour two hundr and fifti men: and they became
a sign.

26:11 notwithstand the children of korah die not.

26:12 the son of simeon after their families: of nemuel, the family
of the nemuelites: of jamin, the famili of the jaminites: of jachin,
th famili of the jachinites: 26:13 Of zerah, the famili of the
zarhites: of shaul, the famili of the shaulites.

26:14 these are the famili of the simeonites, twenti and two
thousand and two hundred.

26:15 the children of gad after their families: of zephon, the family
of the zephonites: of haggi, the famili of the haggites: of shuni, the
famili of the shunites: 26:16 Of ozni, the famili of the oznites: of
eri, the famili of the erites: 26:17 Of arod, the famili of the
arodites: of areli, the famili of the arelites.

26:18 these are the famili of the children of gad accord to those
that were number of them, forti thousand and five hundred.

26:19 the son of judah were Er and onan: and Er and onan die in the
land of canaan.

26:20 and the son of judah after their famili were; of shelah, the
famili of the shelanites: of pharez, the famili of the pharzites: of
zerah, the famili of the zarhites.

26:21 and the son of pharez were; of hezron, the famili of the
hezronites: of hamul, the famili of the hamulites.

26:22 these are the famili of judah accord to those that were
numb of them, threescor and sixteen thousand and five hundred.

26:23 Of the son of issachar after their families: of tola, the
famili of the tolaites: of pua, the famili of the punites: 26:24 of
jashub, the famili of the jashubites: of shimron, the famili of the
shimronites.

26:25 these are the famili of issachar accord to those that were
numb of them, threescor and four thousand and three hundred.

26:26 Of the son of zebulun after their families: of sered, the
famili of the sardites: of elon, the famili of the elonites: of
jahleel, the famili of the jahleelites.

26:27 these are the famili of the zebulunit accord to those
that were number of them, threescor thousand and five hundred.

26:28 the son of joseph after their famili were manasseh and
ephraim.

26:29 Of the son of manasseh: of machir, the famili of the
machirites: and machir begat gilead: of gilead come the famili of the
gileadites.

26:30 these are the son of gilead: of jeezer, the famili of the
jeezerites: of helek, the famili of the helekites: 26:31 and of
asriel, the famili of the asrielites: and of shechem, the famili of
th shechemites: 26:32 and of shemida, the famili of the shemidaites:
and of hepher, the famili of the hepherites.

26:33 and zelophehad the son of hepher had no sons, but daughters: and
th name of the daughter of zelophehad were mahlah, and noah,
hoglah, milcah, and tirzah.

26:34 these are the famili of manasseh, and those that were numbered
of them, fifti and two thousand and seven hundred.

26:35 these are the son of ephraim after their families: of
shuthelah, the famili of the shuthalhites: of becher, the famili of
th bachrites: of tahan, the famili of the tahanites.

26:36 and these are the son of shuthelah: of eran, the famili of the
eranites.

26:37 these are the famili of the son of ephraim accord to those
that were number of them, thirti and two thousand and five hundred.
thes are the son of joseph after their families.

26:38 the son of benjamin after their families: of bela, the family
of the belaites: of ashbel, the famili of the ashbelites: of ahiram,
th famili of the ahiramites: 26:39 Of shupham, the famili of the
shuphamites: of hupham, the famili of the huphamites.

26:40 and the son of bela were ard and naaman: of ard, the famili of
th ardites: and of naaman, the famili of the naamites.

26:41 these are the son of benjamin after their families: and they
that were number of them were forti and five thousand and six
hundred.

26:42 these are the son of dan after their families: of shuham, the
famili of the shuhamites. these are the famili of dan after their
families.

26:43 all the famili of the shuhamites, accord to those that were
numb of them, were threescor and four thousand and four hundred.

26:44 Of the children of asher after their families: of jimna, the
famili of the jimnites: of jesui, the famili of the jesuites: of
beriah, the famili of the beriites.

26:45 Of the son of beriah: of heber, the famili of the heberites: of
malchiel, the famili of the malchielites.

26:46 and the name of the daughter of asher wa sarah.

26:47 these are the famili of the son of asher accord to those
that were number of them; who were fifti and three thousand and four
hundred.

26:48 Of the son of naphtali after their families: of jahzeel, the
famili of the jahzeelites: of guni, the famili of the gunites: 26:49
of jezer, the famili of the jezerites: of shillem, the famili of the
shillemites.

26:50 these are the famili of naphtali accord to their families:
and they that were number of them were forti and five thousand and
four hundred.

26:51 these were the number of the children of israel, six hundred
thousand and a thousand seven hundr and thirty.

26:52 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 26:53 unto these the land
shal be divid for an inherit accord to the number of names.

26:54 To mani thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou
shalt give the less inheritance: to everi one shall hi inherit be
given accord to those that were number of him.

26:55 notwithstand the land shall be divid by lot: accord to
th name of the tribe of their father they shall inherit.

26:56 accord to the lot shall the possess thereof be divided
between mani and few.

26:57 and these are they that were number of the levit after their
families: of gershon, the famili of the gershonites: of kohath, the
famili of the kohathites: of merari, the famili of the merarites.

26:58 these are the famili of the levites: the famili of the
libnites, the famili of the hebronites, the famili of the mahlites,
th famili of the mushites, the famili of the korathites. and kohath
begat amram.

26:59 and the name of amram' wife wa jochebed, the daughter of levi,
whom her mother bare to levi in egypt: and she bare unto amram aaron
and moses, and miriam their sister.

26:60 and unto aaron wa born nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

26:61 and nadab and abihu died, when they offer strang fire before
th lord.

26:62 and those that were number of them were twenti and three
thousand, all male from a month old and upward: for they were not
numb among the children of israel, becaus there wa no
inherit given them among the children of israel.

26:63 these are they that were number by mose and eleazar the
priest, who number the children of israel in the plain of moab by
jordan near jericho.

26:64 but among these there wa not a man of them whom mose and aaron
th priest numbered, when they number the children of israel in the
wild of sinai.

26:65 for the lord had said of them, they shall sure die in the
wilderness. and there wa not left a man of them, save caleb the son
of jephunneh, and joshua the son of nun.

27:1 then came the daughter of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son
of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the famili of
manasseh the son of joseph: and these are the name of hi daughters;
mahlah, noah, and hoglah, and milcah, and tirzah.

27:2 and they stood befor moses, and befor eleazar the priest, and
befor the princ and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacl of the congregation, saying, 27:3 our father die in the
wilderness, and he wa not in the compani of them that gathered
themselv togeth against the lord in the compani of korah; but died
in hi own sin, and had no sons.

27:4 whi should the name of our father be done away from among his
family, becaus he hath no son? give unto us therefor a possession
among the brethren of our father.

27:5 and mose brought their caus befor the lord.

27:6 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 27:7 the daughter of
zelophehad speak right: thou shalt sure give them a possess of an
inherit among their father' brethren; and thou shalt caus the
inherit of their father to pass unto them.

27:8 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, If a
man die, and have no son, then ye shall caus hi inherit to pass
unto hi daughter.

27:9 and if he have no daughter, then ye shall give hi inheritance
unto hi brethren.

27:10 and if he have no brethren, then ye shall give hi inheritance
unto hi father' brethren.

27:11 and if hi father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
inherit unto hi kinsman that is next to him of hi family, and he
shal possess it: and it shall be unto the children of israel a
statut of judgment, as the lord command moses.

27:12 and the lord said unto moses, get thee up into thi mount
abarim, and see the land which I have given unto the children of
israel.

27:13 and when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gather unto thy
people, as aaron thi brother wa gathered.

27:14 for ye rebel against my command in the desert of zin, in
th strife of the congregation, to sanctifi me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of meribah in kadesh in the wilderness
of zin.

27:15 and mose spake unto the lord, saying, 27:16 let the lord, the
god of the spirit of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 which may go out befor them, and which may go in befor them,
and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
congreg of the lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

27:18 and the lord said unto moses, take thee joshua the son of nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 27:19 and set
him befor eleazar the priest, and befor all the congregation; and
giv him a charg in their sight.

27:20 and thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the
congreg of the children of israel may be obedient.

27:21 and he shall stand befor eleazar the priest, who shall ask
counsel for him after the judgment of urim befor the lord: at his
word shall they go out, and at hi word they shall come in, both he,
and all the children of israel with him, even all the congregation.

27:22 and mose did as the lord command him: and he took joshua, and
set him befor eleazar the priest, and befor all the congregation:
27:23 and he laid hi hand upon him, and gave him a charge, as the
lord command by the hand of moses.

28:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 28:2 command the children
of israel, and say unto them, My offering, and my bread for my
sacrific made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe
to offer unto me in their due season.

28:3 and thou shalt say unto them, thi is the offer made by fire
which ye shall offer unto the lord; two lamb of the first year
without spot day by day, for a continu burnt offering.

28:4 the one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb
shalt thou offer at even; 28:5 and a tenth part of an ephah of flour
for a meat offering, mingl with the fourth part of an hin of beaten
oil.

28:6 It is a continu burnt offering, which wa ordain in mount
sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrific made by fire unto the lord.

28:7 and the drink offer thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin
for the one lamb: in the holi place shalt thou caus the strong wine
to be pour unto the lord for a drink offering.

28:8 and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering
of the morning, and as the drink offer thereof, thou shalt offer
it, a sacrific made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

28:9 and on the sabbath day two lamb of the first year without spot,
and two tenth deal of flour for a meat offering, mingl with oil,
and the drink offer thereof: 28:10 thi is the burnt offer of
everi sabbath, besid the continu burnt offering, and hi drink
offering.

28:11 and in the begin of your month ye shall offer a burnt
off unto the lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs
of the first year without spot; 28:12 and three tenth deal of flour
for a meat offering, mingl with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth
deal of flour for a meat offering, mingl with oil, for one ram;
28:13 and a sever tenth deal of flour mingl with oil for a meat
off unto one lamb; for a burnt offer of a sweet savour, a
sacrific made by fire unto the lord.

28:14 and their drink offer shall be half an hin of wine unto a
bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of
an hin unto a lamb: thi is the burnt offer of everi month
throughout the month of the year.

28:15 and one kid of the goat for a sin offer unto the lord shall
b offered, besid the continu burnt offering, and hi drink
offering.

28:16 and in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passov of
th lord.

28:17 and in the fifteenth day of thi month is the feast: seven days
shal unleaven bread be eaten.

28:18 In the first day shall be an holi convocation; ye shall do no
mann of servil work therein: 28:19 but ye shall offer a sacrifice
mad by fire for a burnt offer unto the lord; two young bullocks,
and one ram, and seven lamb of the first year: they shall be unto you
without blemish: 28:20 and their meat offer shall be of flour
mingl with oil: three tenth deal shall ye offer for a bullock, and
two tenth deal for a ram; 28:21 A sever tenth deal shalt thou offer
for everi lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 28:22 and one goat for a
sin offering, to make an aton for you.

28:23 Ye shall offer these besid the burnt offer in the morning,
which is for a continu burnt offering.

28:24 after thi manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven
days, the meat of the sacrific made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
th lord: it shall be offer besid the continu burnt offering, and
hi drink offering.

28:25 and on the seventh day ye shall have an holi convocation; ye
shal do no servil work.

28:26 also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat
off unto the lord, after your week be out, ye shall have an holy
convocation; ye shall do no servil work: 28:27 but ye shall offer the
burnt offer for a sweet savour unto the lord; two young bullocks,
on ram, seven lamb of the first year; 28:28 and their meat offering
of flour mingl with oil, three tenth deal unto one bullock, two
tenth deal unto one ram, 28:29 A sever tenth deal unto one lamb,
throughout the seven lambs; 28:30 and one kid of the goats, to make an
aton for you.

28:31 Ye shall offer them besid the continu burnt offering, and his
meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their
drink offerings.

29:1 and in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall
hav an holi convocation; ye shall do no servil work: it is a day of
blow the trumpet unto you.

29:2 and ye shall offer a burnt offer for a sweet savour unto the
lord; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lamb of the first year
without blemish: 29:3 and their meat offer shall be of flour
mingl with oil, three tenth deal for a bullock, and two tenth deals
for a ram, 29:4 and one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven
lambs: 29:5 and one kid of the goat for a sin offering, to make an
aton for you: 29:6 besid the burnt offer of the month, and
hi meat offering, and the daili burnt offering, and hi meat
offering, and their drink offerings, accord unto their manner, for
a sweet savour, a sacrific made by fire unto the lord.

29:7 and ye shall have on the tenth day of thi seventh month an holy
convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do ani work
therein: 29:8 but ye shall offer a burnt offer unto the lord for a
sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lamb of the first
year; they shall be unto you without blemish: 29:9 and their meat
off shall be of flour mingl with oil, three tenth deal to a
bullock, and two tenth deal to one ram, 29:10 A sever tenth deal
for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 29:11 one kid of the goats
for a sin offering; besid the sin offer of atonement, and the
continu burnt offering, and the meat offer of it, and their drink
offerings.

29:12 and on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an
holi convocation; ye shall do no servil work, and ye shall keep a
feast unto the lord seven days: 29:13 and ye shall offer a burnt
offering, a sacrific made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord;
thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lamb of the first
year; they shall be without blemish: 29:14 and their meat offering
shal be of flour mingl with oil, three tenth deal unto every
bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deal to each ram of the
two rams, 29:15 and a sever tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen
lambs: 29:16 and one kid of the goat for a sin offering; besid the
continu burnt offering, hi meat offering, and hi drink offering.

29:17 and on the second day ye shall offer twelv young bullocks, two
rams, fourteen lamb of the first year without spot: 29:18 and their
meat offer and their drink offer for the bullocks, for the
rams, and for the lambs, shall be accord to their number, after the
manner: 29:19 and one kid of the goat for a sin offering; besid the
continu burnt offering, and the meat offer thereof, and their
drink offerings.

29:20 and on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish; 29:21 and their meat offer and
their drink offer for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be accord to their number, after the manner: 29:22 and
on goat for a sin offering; besid the continu burnt offering, and
hi meat offering, and hi drink offering.

29:23 and on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish: 29:24 their meat offer and their
drink offer for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
shal be accord to their number, after the manner: 29:25 and one
kid of the goat for a sin offering; besid the continu burnt
offering, hi meat offering, and hi drink offering.

29:26 and on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without spot: 29:27 and their meat offer and
their drink offer for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be accord to their number, after the manner: 29:28 and
on goat for a sin offering; besid the continu burnt offering, and
hi meat offering, and hi drink offering.

29:29 and on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lamb of the first year without blemish: 29:30 and their meat offering
and their drink offer for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be accord to their number, after the manner: 29:31 and
on goat for a sin offering; besid the continu burnt offering, his
meat offering, and hi drink offering.

29:32 and on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lamb of the first year without blemish: 29:33 and their meat offering
and their drink offer for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be accord to their number, after the manner: 29:34 and
on goat for a sin offering; besid the continu burnt offering, his
meat offering, and hi drink offering.

29:35 On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do
no servil work therein: 29:36 but ye shall offer a burnt offering, a
sacrific made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord: one bullock,
on ram, seven lamb of the first year without blemish: 29:37 their
meat offer and their drink offer for the bullock, for the ram,
and for the lambs, shall be accord to their number, after the
manner: 29:38 and one goat for a sin offering; besid the continual
burnt offering, and hi meat offering, and hi drink offering.

29:39 these thing ye shall do unto the lord in your set feasts,
besid your vows, and your freewil offerings, for your burnt
offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings,
and for your peac offerings.

29:40 and mose told the children of israel accord to all that the
lord command moses.

30:1 and mose spake unto the head of the tribe concern the
children of israel, saying, thi is the thing which the lord hath
commanded.

30:2 If a man vow a vow unto the lord, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond; he shall not break hi word, he shall do according
to all that proceedeth out of hi mouth.

30:3 If a woman also vow a vow unto the lord, and bind herself by a
bond, be in her father' hous in her youth; 30:4 and her father
hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her
fath shall hold hi peac at her; then all her vow shall stand, and
everi bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.

30:5 but if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not
ani of her vows, or of her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul,
shal stand: and the lord shall forgiv her, becaus her father
disallow her.

30:6 and if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered
ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul; 30:7 and her
husband heard it, and held hi peac at her in the day that he heard
it: then her vow shall stand, and her bond wherewith she bound her
soul shall stand.

30:8 but if her husband disallow her on the day that he heard it;
then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered
with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the
lord shall forgiv her.

30:9 but everi vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith
they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.

30:10 and if she vow in her husband' house, or bound her soul by a
bond with an oath; 30:11 and her husband heard it, and held hi peace
at her, and disallow her not: then all her vow shall stand, and
everi bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.

30:12 but if her husband hath utterli made them void on the day he
heard them; then whatsoev proceed out of her lip concern her
vows, or concern the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband
hath made them void; and the lord shall forgiv her.

30:13 everi vow, and everi bind oath to afflict the soul, her
husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.

30:14 but if her husband altogeth hold hi peac at her from day to
day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are
upon her: he confirmeth them, becaus he held hi peac at her in the
day that he heard them.

30:15 but if he shall ani way make them void after that he hath heard
them; then he shall bear her iniquity.

30:16 these are the statutes, which the lord command moses, between
a man and hi wife, between the father and hi daughter, be yet in
her youth in her father' house.

31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 aveng the children
of israel of the midianites: afterward shalt thou be gather unto thy
people.

31:3 and mose spake unto the people, saying, arm some of yourselves
unto the war, and let them go against the midianites, and aveng the
lord of midian.

31:4 Of everi tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribe of israel,
shal ye send to the war.

31:5 So there were deliv out of the thousand of israel, a
thousand of everi tribe, twelv thousand arm for war.

31:6 and mose sent them to the war, a thousand of everi tribe, them
and phineha the son of eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy
instruments, and the trumpet to blow in hi hand.

31:7 and they war against the midianites, as the lord commanded
moses; and they slew all the males.

31:8 and they slew the king of midian, besid the rest of them that
wer slain; namely, evi, and rekem, and zur, and hur, and reba, five
k of midian: balaam also the son of beor they slew with the sword.

31:9 and the children of israel took all the women of midian captives,
and their littl ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all
their flocks, and all their goods.

31:10 and they burnt all their citi wherein they dwelt, and all
their goodli castles, with fire.

31:11 and they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and
of beasts.

31:12 and they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto
moses, and eleazar the priest, and unto the congreg of the
children of israel, unto the camp at the plain of moab, which are by
jordan near jericho.

31:13 and moses, and eleazar the priest, and all the princ of the
congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.

31:14 and mose wa wroth with the offic of the host, with the
captain over thousands, and captain over hundreds, which came from
th battle.

31:15 and mose said unto them, have ye save all the women alive?
31:16 behold, these caus the children of israel, through the counsel
of balaam, to commit trespass against the lord in the matter of peor,
and there wa a plagu among the congreg of the lord.

31:17 now therefor kill everi male among the littl ones, and kill
everi woman that hath known man by lie with him.

31:18 but all the women children, that have not known a man by lying
with him, keep aliv for yourselves.

31:19 and do ye abid without the camp seven days: whosoev hath
kil ani person, and whosoev hath touch ani slain, purifi both
yourselv and your captiv on the third day, and on the seventh day.

31:20 and purifi all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and
al work of goats' hair, and all thing made of wood.

31:21 and eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to
th battle, thi is the ordin of the law which the lord commanded
moses; 31:22 onli the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the
tin, and the lead, 31:23 everi thing that may abid the fire, ye shall
mak it go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it
shal be purifi with the water of separation: and all that abideth
not the fire ye shall make go through the water.

31:24 and ye shall wash your cloth on the seventh day, and ye shall
b clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.

31:25 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:26 take the sum of the
prey that wa taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and eleazar the
priest, and the chief father of the congregation: 31:27 and divide
th prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who
went out to battle, and between all the congregation: 31:28 and levi a
tribut unto the lord of the men of war which went out to battle: one
soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of
th asses, and of the sheep: 31:29 take it of their half, and give it
unto eleazar the priest, for an heav offer of the lord.

31:30 and of the children of israel' half, thou shalt take one
port of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of
th flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the levites,
which keep the charg of the tabernacl of the lord.

31:31 and mose and eleazar the priest did as the lord commanded
moses.

31:32 and the booty, be the rest of the prey which the men of war
had caught, wa six hundr thousand and seventi thousand and five
thousand sheep, 31:33 and threescor and twelv thousand beeves, 31:34
and threescor and one thousand asses, 31:35 and thirti and two
thousand person in all, of women that had not known man by lie with
him.

31:36 and the half, which wa the portion of them that went out to
war, wa in number three hundr thousand and seven and thirty
thousand and five hundr sheep: 31:37 and the lord' tribut of the
sheep wa six hundr and threescor and fifteen.

31:38 and the beev were thirti and six thousand; of which the lord's
tribut wa threescor and twelve.

31:39 and the ass were thirti thousand and five hundred; of which
th lord' tribut wa threescor and one.

31:40 and the person were sixteen thousand; of which the lord's
tribut wa thirti and two persons.

31:41 and mose gave the tribute, which wa the lord' heav offering,
unto eleazar the priest, as the lord command moses.

31:42 and of the children of israel' half, which mose divid from
th men that warred, 31:43 (now the half that pertain unto the
congreg wa three hundr thousand and thirti thousand and seven
thousand and five hundr sheep, 31:44 and thirti and six thousand
beeves, 31:45 and thirti thousand ass and five hundred, 31:46 and
sixteen thousand persons;) 31:47 even of the children of israel's
half, mose took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and
gav them unto the levites, which kept the charg of the tabernacl of
th lord; as the lord command moses.

31:48 and the offic which were over thousand of the host, the
captain of thousands, and captain of hundreds, came near unto moses:
31:49 and they said unto moses, thi servant have taken the sum of the
men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man
of us.

31:50 We have therefor brought an oblat for the lord, what every
man hath gotten, of jewel of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings,
earrings, and tablets, to make an aton for our soul befor the
lord.

31:51 and mose and eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all
wrought jewels.

31:52 and all the gold of the offer that they offer up to the
lord, of the captain of thousands, and of the captain of hundreds,
wa sixteen thousand seven hundr and fifti shekels.

31:53 (for the men of war had taken spoil, everi man for himself.)
31:54 and mose and eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains
of thousand and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacl of
th congregation, for a memori for the children of israel befor the
lord.

32:1 now the children of reuben and the children of gad had a very
great multitud of cattle: and when they saw the land of jazer, and
th land of gilead, that, behold, the place wa a place for cattle;
32:2 the children of gad and the children of reuben came and spake
unto moses, and to eleazar the priest, and unto the princ of the
congregation, saying, 32:3 ataroth, and dibon, and jazer, and nimrah,
and heshbon, and elealeh, and shebam, and nebo, and beon, 32:4 even
th countri which the lord smote befor the congreg of israel, is
a land for cattle, and thi servant have cattle: 32:5 wherefore, said
they, if we have found grace in thi sight, let thi land be given unto
thi servant for a possession, and bring us not over jordan.

32:6 and mose said unto the children of gad and to the children of
reuben, shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?  32:7
and wherefor discourag ye the heart of the children of israel from
go over into the land which the lord hath given them?  32:8 thus
did your fathers, when I sent them from kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 for when they went up unto the valley of eshcol, and saw the
land, they discourag the heart of the children of israel, that they
should not go into the land which the lord had given them.

32:10 and the lord' anger wa kindl the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 sure none of the men that came up out of egypt, from
twenti year old and upward, shall see the land which I sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob; becaus they have not wholly
follow me: 32:12 save caleb the son of jephunneh the kenezite, and
joshua the son of nun: for they have wholli follow the lord.

32:13 and the lord' anger wa kindl against israel, and he made
them wander in the wilder forti years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the lord, wa consumed.

32:14 and, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sin men, to augment yet the fierc anger of the lord toward
israel.

32:15 for if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leav them
in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all thi people.

32:16 and they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds
her for our cattle, and citi for our littl ones: 32:17 but we
ourselv will go readi arm befor the children of israel, until we
hav brought them unto their place: and our littl one shall dwell in
th fenc citi becaus of the inhabit of the land.

32:18 We will not return unto our houses, until the children of israel
hav inherit everi man hi inheritance.

32:19 for we will not inherit with them on yonder side jordan, or
forward; becaus our inherit is fallen to us on thi side jordan
eastward.

32:20 and mose said unto them, If ye will do thi thing, if ye will
go arm befor the lord to war, 32:21 and will go all of you armed
ov jordan befor the lord, until he hath driven out hi enemi from
befor him, 32:22 and the land be subdu befor the lord: then
afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless befor the lord, and
befor israel; and thi land shall be your possess befor the lord.

32:23 but if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sin against the
lord: and be sure your sin will find you out.

32:24 build you citi for your littl ones, and fold for your sheep;
and do that which hath proceed out of your mouth.

32:25 and the children of gad and the children of reuben spake unto
moses, saying, thi servant will do as my lord commandeth.

32:26 our littl ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,
shal be there in the citi of gilead: 32:27 but thi servant will
pass over, everi man arm for war, befor the lord to battle, as my
lord saith.

32:28 So concern them mose command eleazar the priest, and
joshua the son of nun, and the chief father of the tribe of the
children of israel: 32:29 and mose said unto them, If the children of
gad and the children of reuben will pass with you over jordan, every
man arm to battle, befor the lord, and the land shall be subdued
befor you; then ye shall give them the land of gilead for a
possession: 32:30 but if they will not pass over with you armed, they
shal have possess among you in the land of canaan.

32:31 and the children of gad and the children of reuben answered,
saying, As the lord hath said unto thi servants, so will we do.

32:32 We will pass over arm befor the lord into the land of canaan,
that the possess of our inherit on thi side jordan may be
ours.

32:33 and mose gave unto them, even to the children of gad, and to
th children of reuben, and unto half the tribe of manasseh the son of
joseph, the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, and the kingdom of
og king of bashan, the land, with the citi thereof in the coasts,
even the citi of the countri round about.

32:34 and the children of gad built dibon, and ataroth, and aroer,
32:35 and atroth, shophan, and jaazer, and jogbehah, 32:36 and
bethnimrah, and bethharan, fenc cities: and fold for sheep.

32:37 and the children of reuben built heshbon, and elealeh, and
kirjathaim, 32:38 and nebo, and baalmeon, (their name be changed,)
and shibmah: and gave other name unto the citi which they builded.

32:39 and the children of machir the son of manasseh went to gilead,
and took it, and dispossess the amorit which wa in it.

32:40 and mose gave gilead unto machir the son of manasseh; and he
dwelt therein.

32:41 and jair the son of manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and call them havothjair.

32:42 and nobah went and took kenath, and the villag thereof, and
cal it nobah, after hi own name.

33:1 these are the journey of the children of israel, which went
forth out of the land of egypt with their armi under the hand of
mos and aaron.

33:2 and mose wrote their go out accord to their journey by
th command of the lord: and these are their journey accord to
their go out.

33:3 and they depart from rames in the first month, on the
fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passov the
children of israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the
egyptians.

33:4 for the egyptian buri all their firstborn, which the lord had
smitten among them: upon their god also the lord execut judgments.

33:5 and the children of israel remov from rameses, and pitch in
succoth.

33:6 and they depart from succoth, and pitch in etham, which is in
th edg of the wilderness.

33:7 and they remov from etham, and turn again unto pihahiroth,
which is befor baalzephon: and they pitch befor migdol.

33:8 and they depart from befor pihahiroth, and pass through the
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in
th wilder of etham, and pitch in marah.

33:9 and they remov from marah, and came unto elim: and in elim were
twelv fountain of water, and threescor and ten palm trees; and they
pitch there.

33:10 and they remov from elim, and encamp by the red sea.

33:11 and they remov from the red sea, and encamp in the
wild of sin.

33:12 and they took their journey out of the wilder of sin, and
encamp in dophkah.

33:13 and they depart from dophkah, and encamp in alush.

33:14 and they remov from alush, and encamp at rephidim, where was
no water for the peopl to drink.

33:15 and they depart from rephidim, and pitch in the wilderness
of sinai.

33:16 and they remov from the desert of sinai, and pitch at
kibrothhattaavah.

33:17 and they depart from kibrothhattaavah, and encamp at
hazeroth.

33:18 and they depart from hazeroth, and pitch in rithmah.

33:19 and they depart from rithmah, and pitch at rimmonparez.

33:20 and they depart from rimmonparez, and pitch in libnah.

33:21 and they remov from libnah, and pitch at rissah.

33:22 and they journey from rissah, and pitch in kehelathah.

33:23 and they went from kehelathah, and pitch in mount shapher.

33:24 and they remov from mount shapher, and encamp in haradah.

33:25 and they remov from haradah, and pitch in makheloth.

33:26 and they remov from makheloth, and encamp at tahath.

33:27 and they depart from tahath, and pitch at tarah.

33:28 and they remov from tarah, and pitch in mithcah.

33:29 and they went from mithcah, and pitch in hashmonah.

33:30 and they depart from hashmonah, and encamp at moseroth.

33:31 and they depart from moseroth, and pitch in benejaakan.

33:32 and they remov from benejaakan, and encamp at horhagidgad.

33:33 and they went from horhagidgad, and pitch in jotbathah.

33:34 and they remov from jotbathah, and encamp at ebronah.

33:35 and they depart from ebronah, and encamp at eziongaber.

33:36 and they remov from eziongaber, and pitch in the wilderness
of zin, which is kadesh.

33:37 and they remov from kadesh, and pitch in mount hor, in the
edg of the land of edom.

33:38 and aaron the priest went up into mount hor at the commandment
of the lord, and die there, in the fortieth year after the children
of israel were come out of the land of egypt, in the first day of the
fifth month.

33:39 and aaron wa an hundr and twenti and three year old when he
di in mount hor.

33:40 and king arad the canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the
land of canaan, heard of the come of the children of israel.

33:41 and they depart from mount hor, and pitch in zalmonah.

33:42 and they depart from zalmonah, and pitch in punon.

33:43 and they depart from punon, and pitch in oboth.

33:44 and they depart from oboth, and pitch in ijeabarim, in the
bord of moab.

33:45 and they depart from iim, and pitch in dibongad.

33:46 and they remov from dibongad, and encamp in almondiblathaim.

33:47 and they remov from almondiblathaim, and pitch in the
mountain of abarim, befor nebo.

33:48 and they depart from the mountain of abarim, and pitch in
th plain of moab by jordan near jericho.

33:49 and they pitch by jordan, from bethjesimoth even unto
abelshittim in the plain of moab.

33:50 and the lord spake unto mose in the plain of moab by jordan
near jericho, saying, 33:51 speak unto the children of israel, and say
unto them, when ye are pass over jordan into the land of canaan;
33:52 then ye shall drive out all the inhabit of the land from
befor you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their
molten images, and quit pluck down all their high places: 33:53 and
y shall dispossess the inhabit of the land, and dwell therein:
for I have given you the land to possess it.

33:54 and ye shall divid the land by lot for an inherit among
your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and
to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: everi man's
inherit shall be in the place where hi lot falleth; accord to
th tribe of your father ye shall inherit.

33:55 but if ye will not drive out the inhabit of the land from
befor you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain
of them shall be prick in your eyes, and thorn in your sides, and
shal vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.

33:56 moreov it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as i
thought to do unto them.

34:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 34:2 command the children
of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the land of canaan;
(thi is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even
th land of canaan with the coast thereof:) 34:3 then your south
quart shall be from the wilder of zin along by the coast of
edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea
eastward: 34:4 and your border shall turn from the south to the ascent
of akrabbim, and pass on to zin: and the go forth thereof shall be
from the south to kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to hazaraddar, and
pass on to azmon: 34:5 and the border shall fetch a compass from azmon
unto the river of egypt, and the go out of it shall be at the sea.

34:6 and as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea
for a border: thi shall be your west border.

34:7 and thi shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall
point out for you mount hor: 34:8 from mount hor ye shall point out
your border unto the entranc of hamath; and the go forth of the
bord shall be to zedad: 34:9 and the border shall go on to ziphron,
and the go out of it shall be at hazarenan: thi shall be your
north border.

34:10 and ye shall point out your east border from hazarenan to
shepham: 34:11 and the coast shall go down from shepham to riblah, on
th east side of ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach
unto the side of the sea of chinnereth eastward: 34:12 and the border
shal go down to jordan, and the go out of it shall be at the salt
sea: thi shall be your land with the coast thereof round about.

34:13 and mose command the children of israel, saying, thi is the
land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the lord command to give
unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe: 34:14 for the tribe of
th children of reuben accord to the hous of their fathers, and
th tribe of the children of gad accord to the hous of their
fathers, have receiv their inheritance; and half the tribe of
manasseh have receiv their inheritance: 34:15 the two tribe and the
half tribe have receiv their inherit on thi side jordan near
jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.

34:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 34:17 these are the names
of the men which shall divid the land unto you: eleazar the priest,
and joshua the son of nun.

34:18 and ye shall take one princ of everi tribe, to divid the land
bi inheritance.

34:19 and the name of the men are these: Of the tribe of judah, caleb
th son of jephunneh.

34:20 and of the tribe of the children of simeon, shemuel the son of
ammihud.

34:21 Of the tribe of benjamin, elidad the son of chislon.

34:22 and the princ of the tribe of the children of dan, bukki the
son of jogli.

34:23 the princ of the children of joseph, for the tribe of the
children of manasseh, hanniel the son of ephod.

34:24 and the princ of the tribe of the children of ephraim, kemuel
th son of shiphtan.

34:25 and the princ of the tribe of the children of zebulun,
elizaphan the son of parnach.

34:26 and the princ of the tribe of the children of issachar, paltiel
th son of azzan.

34:27 and the princ of the tribe of the children of asher, ahihud the
son of shelomi.

34:28 and the princ of the tribe of the children of naphtali, pedahel
th son of ammihud.

34:29 these are they whom the lord command to divid the inheritance
unto the children of israel in the land of canaan.

35:1 and the lord spake unto mose in the plain of moab by jordan
near jericho, saying, 35:2 command the children of israel, that they
giv unto the levit of the inherit of their possess citi to
dwel in; and ye shall give also unto the levit suburb for the
citi round about them.

35:3 and the citi shall they have to dwell in; and the suburb of
them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their
beasts.

35:4 and the suburb of the cities, which ye shall give unto the
levites, shall reach from the wall of the citi and outward a thousand
cubit round about.

35:5 and ye shall measur from without the citi on the east side two
thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the
west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand
cubits; and the citi shall be in the midst: thi shall be to them the
suburb of the cities.

35:6 and among the citi which ye shall give unto the levit there
shal be six citi for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the
manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty
and two cities.

35:7 So all the citi which ye shall give to the levit shall be
forti and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.

35:8 and the citi which ye shall give shall be of the possess of
th children of israel: from them that have mani ye shall give many;
but from them that have few ye shall give few: everi one shall give of
hi citi unto the levit accord to hi inherit which he
inheriteth.

35:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 35:10 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come over jordan
into the land of canaan; 35:11 then ye shall appoint you citi to be
citi of refug for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which
killeth ani person at unawares.

35:12 and they shall be unto you citi for refug from the avenger;
that the manslay die not, until he stand befor the congreg in
judgment.

35:13 and of these citi which ye shall give six citi shall ye have
for refuge.

35:14 Ye shall give three citi on thi side jordan, and three cities
shal ye give in the land of canaan, which shall be citi of refuge.

35:15 these six citi shall be a refuge, both for the children of
israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourn among them: that
everi one that killeth ani person unawar may flee thither.

35:16 and if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die,
h is a murderer: the murder shall sure be put to death.

35:17 and if he smite him with throw a stone, wherewith he may die,
and he die, he is a murderer: the murder shall sure be put to
death.

35:18 Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may
die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murder shall sure be put to
death.

35:19 the reveng of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he
meeteth him, he shall slay him.

35:20 but if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by lay of
wait, that he die; 35:21 Or in enmiti smite him with hi hand, that he
die: he that smote him shall sure be put to death; for he is a
murderer: the reveng of blood shall slay the murderer, when he
meeteth him.

35:22 but if he thrust him suddenli without enmity, or have cast upon
him ani thing without lay of wait, 35:23 Or with ani stone,
wherewith a man may die, see him not, and cast it upon him, that he
die, and wa not hi enemy, neither sought hi harm: 35:24 then the
congreg shall judg between the slayer and the reveng of blood
accord to these judgments: 35:25 and the congreg shall deliver
th slayer out of the hand of the reveng of blood, and the
congreg shall restor him to the citi of hi refuge, whither he
wa fled: and he shall abid in it unto the death of the high priest,
which wa anoint with the holi oil.

35:26 but if the slayer shall at ani time come without the border of
th citi of hi refuge, whither he wa fled; 35:27 and the reveng of
blood find him without the border of the citi of hi refuge, and the
reveng of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilti of blood:
35:28 becaus he should have remain in the citi of hi refug until
th death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest
th slayer shall return into the land of hi possession.

35:29 So these thing shall be for a statut of judgment unto you
throughout your gener in all your dwellings.

35:30 whoso killeth ani person, the murder shall be put to death by
th mouth of witnesses: but one wit shall not testifi against any
person to caus him to die.

35:31 moreov ye shall take no satisfact for the life of a
murderer, which is guilti of death: but he shall be sure put to
death.

35:32 and ye shall take no satisfact for him that is fled to the
citi of hi refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land,
until the death of the priest.

35:33 So ye shall not pollut the land wherein ye are: for blood it
defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleans of the blood that
i shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

35:34 defil not therefor the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein i
dwell: for I the lord dwell among the children of israel.

36:1 and the chief father of the famili of the children of gilead,
th son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the famili of the son of
joseph, came near, and spake befor moses, and befor the princes, the
chief father of the children of israel: 36:2 and they said, the lord
command my lord to give the land for an inherit by lot to the
children of israel: and my lord wa command by the lord to give the
inherit of zelophehad our brother unto hi daughters.

36:3 and if they be marri to ani of the son of the other tribe of
th children of israel, then shall their inherit be taken from the
inherit of our fathers, and shall be put to the inherit of the
trib whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot
of our inheritance.

36:4 and when the jubil of the children of israel shall be, then
shal their inherit be put unto the inherit of the tribe
whereunto they are received: so shall their inherit be taken away
from the inherit of the tribe of our fathers.

36:5 and mose command the children of israel accord to the word
of the lord, saying, the tribe of the son of joseph hath said well.

36:6 thi is the thing which the lord doth command concern the
daught of zelophehad, saying, let them marri to whom they think
best; onli to the famili of the tribe of their father shall they
marry.

36:7 So shall not the inherit of the children of israel remove
from tribe to tribe: for everi one of the children of israel shall
keep himself to the inherit of the tribe of hi fathers.

36:8 and everi daughter, that possesseth an inherit in ani tribe
of the children of israel, shall be wife unto one of the famili of the
trib of her father, that the children of israel may enjoy everi man
th inherit of hi fathers.

36:9 neither shall the inherit remov from one tribe to another
tribe; but everi one of the tribe of the children of israel shall
keep himself to hi own inheritance.

36:10 even as the lord command moses, so did the daughter of
zelophehad: 36:11 for mahlah, tirzah, and hoglah, and milcah, and
noah, the daughter of zelophehad, were marri unto their father's
brothers' sons: 36:12 and they were marri into the famili of the
son of manasseh the son of joseph, and their inherit remain in
th tribe of the famili of their father.

36:13 these are the command and the judgments, which the lord
command by the hand of mose unto the children of israel in the
plain of moab by jordan near jericho.




th fifth book of moses:  call deuteronomy


1:1 these be the word which mose spake unto all israel on thi side
jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the red sea,
between paran, and tophel, and laban, and hazeroth, and dizahab.

1:2 (there are eleven days' journey from horeb by the way of mount
seir unto kadeshbarnea.)  1:3 and it came to pass in the fortieth
year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that moses
spak unto the children of israel, accord unto all that the lord
had given him in command unto them; 1:4 after he had slain sihon
th king of the amorites, which dwelt in heshbon, and Og the king of
bashan, which dwelt at astaroth in edrei: 1:5 On thi side jordan, in
th land of moab, began mose to declar thi law, saying, 1:6 the
lord our god spake unto us in horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough
in thi mount: 1:7 turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the amorites, and unto all the place nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the canaanites, and unto lebanon, unto the great
river, the river euphrates.

1:8 behold, I have set the land befor you: go in and possess the land
which the lord sware unto your fathers, abraham, isaac, and jacob, to
giv unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 and I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not abl to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 the lord your god hath multipli you, and,
behold, ye are thi day as the star of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (the lord god of your father make you a thousand time so many
mor as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promis you!)  1:12 how can
i myself alon bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your
tribes, and I will make them ruler over you.

1:14 and ye answer me, and said, the thing which thou hast spoken is
good for us to do.

1:15 So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made
them head over you, captain over thousands, and captain over
hundreds, and captain over fifties, and captain over tens, and
offic among your tribes.

1:16 and I charg your judg at that time, saying, hear the causes
between your brethren, and judg righteous between everi man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him.

1:17 Ye shall not respect person in judgment; but ye shall hear the
smal as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man;
for the judgment is god's: and the caus that is too hard for you,
br it unto me, and I will hear it.

1:18 and I command you at that time all the thing which ye should
do.

1:19 and when we depart from horeb, we went through all that great
and terribl wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of
th amorites, as the lord our god command us; and we came to
kadeshbarnea.

1:20 and I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the
amorites, which the lord our god doth give unto us.

1:21 behold, the lord thi god hath set the land befor thee: go up and
possess it, as the lord god of thi father hath said unto thee; fear
not, neither be discouraged.

1:22 and ye came near unto me everi one of you, and said, We will send
men befor us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us
word again by what way we must go up, and into what citi we shall
come.

1:23 and the say pleas me well: and I took twelv men of you, one
of a tribe: 1:24 and they turn and went up into the mountain, and
cam unto the valley of eshcol, and search it out.

1:25 and they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and
brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a
good land which the lord our god doth give us.

1:26 notwithstand ye would not go up, but rebel against the
command of the lord your god: 1:27 and ye murmur in your tents,
and said, becaus the lord hate us, he hath brought us forth out of
th land of egypt, to deliv us into the hand of the amorites, to
destroy us.

1:28 whither shall we go up? our brethren have discourag our heart,
saying, the peopl is greater and taller than we; the citi are great
and wall up to heaven; and moreov we have seen the son of the
anakim there.

1:29 then I said unto you, dread not, neither be afraid of them.

1:30 the lord your god which goeth befor you, he shall fight for you,
accord to all that he did for you in egypt befor your eyes; 1:31
and in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the lord thi god
bar thee, as a man doth bear hi son, in all the way that ye went,
until ye came into thi place.

1:32 yet in thi thing ye did not believ the lord your god, 1:33 who
went in the way befor you, to search you out a place to pitch your
tent in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and
in a cloud by day.

1:34 and the lord heard the voic of your words, and wa wroth, and
sware, saying, 1:35 sure there shall not one of these men of this
evil gener see that good land, which I sware to give unto your
fathers.

1:36 save caleb the son of jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will
i give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to hi children,
becaus he hath wholli follow the lord.

1:37 also the lord wa angri with me for your sakes, saying, thou also
shalt not go in thither.

1:38 but joshua the son of nun, which standeth befor thee, he shall
go in thither: encourag him: for he shall caus israel to inherit it.

1:39 moreov your littl ones, which ye said should be a prey, and
your children, which in that day had no knowledg between good and
evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they
shal possess it.

1:40 but as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the
wild by the way of the red sea.

1:41 then ye answer and said unto me, We have sin against the
lord, we will go up and fight, accord to all that the lord our god
command us.

and when ye had gird on everi man hi weapon of war, ye were ready
to go up into the hill.

1:42 and the lord said unto me, say unto them. Go not up, neither
fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten befor your enemies.

1:43 So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebel against
th command of the lord, and went presumptu up into the hill.

1:44 and the amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against
you, and chase you, as bee do, and destroy you in seir, even unto
hormah.

1:45 and ye return and wept befor the lord; but the lord would not
hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.

1:46 So ye abod in kadesh mani days, accord unto the day that ye
abod there.

2:1 then we turned, and took our journey into the wilder by the
way of the red sea, as the lord spake unto me: and we compass mount
seir mani days.

2:2 and the lord spake unto me, saying, 2:3 Ye have compass this
mountain long enough: turn you northward.

2:4 and command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the
coast of your brethren the children of esau, which dwell in seir; and
they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves
therefore: 2:5 meddl not with them; for I will not give you of their
land, no, not so much as a foot breadth; becaus I have given mount
seir unto esau for a possession.

2:6 Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall
also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.

2:7 for the lord thi god hath bless thee in all the work of thy
hand: he knoweth thi walk through thi great wilderness: these
forti year the lord thi god hath been with thee; thou hast lacked
nothing.

2:8 and when we pass by from our brethren the children of esau,
which dwelt in seir, through the way of the plain from elath, and from
eziongaber, we turn and pass by the way of the wilder of moab.

2:9 and the lord said unto me, distress not the moabites, neither
contend with them in battle: for I will not give thee of their land
for a possession; becaus I have given Ar unto the children of lot for
a possession.

2:10 the emim dwelt therein in time past, a peopl great, and many,
and tall, as the anakims; 2:11 which also were account giants, as
th anakims; but the moabit call them emims.

2:12 the horim also dwelt in seir beforetime; but the children of
esau succeed them, when they had destroy them from befor them,
and dwelt in their stead; as israel did unto the land of his
possession, which the lord gave unto them.

2:13 now rise up, said I, and get you over the brook zered. and we
went over the brook zered.

2:14 and the space in which we came from kadeshbarnea, until we were
com over the brook zered, wa thirti and eight years; until all the
gener of the men of war were wast out from among the host, as
th lord sware unto them.

2:15 for inde the hand of the lord wa against them, to destroy them
from among the host, until they were consumed.

2:16 So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consum and
dead from among the people, 2:17 that the lord spake unto me, saying,
2:18 thou art to pass over through ar, the coast of moab, thi day:
2:19 and when thou comest nigh over against the children of ammon,
distress them not, nor meddl with them: for I will not give thee of
th land of the children of ammon ani possession; becaus I have given
it unto the children of lot for a possession.

2:20 (that also wa account a land of giants: giant dwelt therein
in old time; and the ammonit call them zamzummims; 2:21 A people
great, and many, and tall, as the anakims; but the lord destroy them
befor them; and they succeed them, and dwelt in their stead: 2:22
a he did to the children of esau, which dwelt in seir, when he
destroy the horim from befor them; and they succeed them, and
dwelt in their stead even unto thi day: 2:23 and the avim which
dwelt in hazerim, even unto azzah, the caphtorims, which came forth
out of caphtor, destroy them, and dwelt in their stead.)  2:24 rise
y up, take your journey, and pass over the river arnon: behold, i
hav given into thine hand sihon the amorite, king of heshbon, and his
land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.

2:25 thi day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of
the upon the nation that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear
report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish becaus of thee.

2:26 and I sent messeng out of the wilder of kedemoth unto
sihon king of heshbon with word of peace, saying, 2:27 let me pass
through thi land: I will go along by the high way, I will neither turn
unto the right hand nor to the left.

2:28 thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me
wat for money, that I may drink: onli I will pass through on my
feet; 2:29 (a the children of esau which dwell in seir, and the
moabit which dwell in ar, did unto me;) until I shall pass over
jordan into the land which the lord our god giveth us.

2:30 but sihon king of heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the
lord thi god harden hi spirit, and made hi heart obstinate, that
h might deliv him into thi hand, as appeareth thi day.

2:31 and the lord said unto me, behold, I have begun to give sihon and
hi land befor thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his
land.

2:32 then sihon came out against us, he and all hi people, to fight
at jahaz.

2:33 and the lord our god deliv him befor us; and we smote him,
and hi sons, and all hi people.

2:34 and we took all hi citi at that time, and utterli destroyed
th men, and the women, and the littl ones, of everi city, we left
non to remain: 2:35 onli the cattl we took for a prey unto
ourselves, and the spoil of the citi which we took.

2:36 from aroer, which is by the brink of the river of arnon, and from
th citi that is by the river, even unto gilead, there wa not one
c too strong for us: the lord our god deliv all unto us: 2:37
onli unto the land of the children of ammon thou camest not, nor unto
ani place of the river jabbok, nor unto the citi in the mountains,
nor unto whatsoev the lord our god forbad us.

3:1 then we turned, and went up the way to bashan: and Og the king of
bashan came out against us, he and all hi people, to battl at edrei.

3:2 and the lord said unto me, fear him not: for I will deliv him,
and all hi people, and hi land, into thi hand; and thou shalt do
unto him as thou didst unto sihon king of the amorites, which dwelt at
heshbon.

3:3 So the lord our god deliv into our hand Og also, the king of
bashan, and all hi people: and we smote him until none wa left to
him remaining.

3:4 and we took all hi citi at that time, there wa not a city
which we took not from them, threescor cities, all the region of
argob, the kingdom of Og in bashan.

3:5 all these citi were fenc with high walls, gates, and bars;
besid unwal town a great many.

3:6 and we utterli destroy them, as we did unto sihon king of
heshbon, utterli destroy the men, women, and children, of every
city.

3:7 but all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a
prey to ourselves.

3:8 and we took at that time out of the hand of the two king of the
amorit the land that wa on thi side jordan, from the river of
arnon unto mount hermon; 3:9 (which hermon the sidonian call sirion;
and the amorit call it shenir;) 3:10 all the citi of the plain,
and all gilead, and all bashan, unto salchah and edrei, citi of the
kingdom of Og in bashan.

3:11 for onli Og king of bashan remain of the remnant of giants;
behold hi bedstead wa a bedstead of iron; is it not in rabbath of
th children of ammon? nine cubit wa the length thereof, and four
cubit the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.

3:12 and thi land, which we possess at that time, from aroer, which
i by the river arnon, and half mount gilead, and the citi thereof,
gav I unto the reubenit and to the gadites.

3:13 and the rest of gilead, and all bashan, be the kingdom of og,
gav I unto the half tribe of manasseh; all the region of argob, with
al bashan, which wa call the land of giants.

3:14 jair the son of manasseh took all the countri of argob unto the
coast of geshuri and maachathi; and call them after hi own name,
bashanhavothjair, unto thi day.

3:15 and I gave gilead unto machir.

3:16 and unto the reubenit and unto the gadit I gave from gilead
even unto the river arnon half the valley, and the border even unto
th river jabbok, which is the border of the children of ammon; 3:17
the plain also, and jordan, and the coast thereof, from chinnereth
even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under ashdothpisgah
eastward.

3:18 and I command you at that time, saying, the lord your god hath
given you thi land to possess it: ye shall pass over arm before
your brethren the children of israel, all that are meet for the war.

3:19 but your wives, and your littl ones, and your cattle, (for i
know that ye have much cattle,) shall abid in your citi which i
hav given you; 3:20 until the lord have given rest unto your
brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land
which the lord your god hath given them beyond jordan: and then shall
y return everi man unto hi possession, which I have given you.

3:21 and I command joshua at that time, saying, thine eye have seen
al that the lord your god hath done unto these two kings: so shall
th lord do unto all the kingdom whither thou passest.

3:22 Ye shall not fear them: for the lord your god he shall fight for
you.

3:23 and I besought the lord at that time, saying, 3:24 O lord god,
thou hast begun to shew thi servant thi greatness, and thi mighty
hand: for what god is there in heaven or in earth, that can do
accord to thi works, and accord to thi might?  3:25 I pray thee,
let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond jordan, that
goodli mountain, and lebanon.

3:26 but the lord wa wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear
me: and the lord said unto me, let it suffic thee; speak no more unto
m of thi matter.

3:27 get thee up into the top of pisgah, and lift up thine eyes
westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it
with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over thi jordan.

3:28 but charg joshua, and encourag him, and strengthen him: for he
shal go over befor thi people, and he shall caus them to inherit
th land which thou shalt see.

3:29 So we abod in the valley over against bethpeor.

4:1 now therefor hearken, O israel, unto the statut and unto the
judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go
in and possess the land which the lord god of your father giveth you.

4:2 Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall
y diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the command of the
lord your god which I command you.

4:3 your eye have seen what the lord did becaus of baalpeor: for all
th men that follow baalpeor, the lord thi god hath destroy them
from among you.

4:4 but ye that did cleav unto the lord your god are aliv everi one
of you thi day.

4:5 behold, I have taught you statut and judgments, even as the lord
mi god command me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to
possess it.

4:6 keep therefor and do them; for thi is your wisdom and your
understand in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, sure thi great nation is a wise and
understand people.

4:7 for what nation is there so great, who hath god so nigh unto them,
a the lord our god is in all thing that we call upon him for?  4:8
and what nation is there so great, that hath statut and judgment so
right as all thi law, which I set befor you thi day?  4:9 only
tak heed to thyself, and keep thi soul diligently, lest thou forget
th thing which thine eye have seen, and lest they depart from thy
heart all the day of thi life: but teach them thi sons, and thi sons'
sons; 4:10 special the day that thou stoodest befor the lord thy
god in horeb, when the lord said unto me, gather me the people
together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to
fear me all the day that they shall live upon the earth, and that
they may teach their children.

4:11 and ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain
burn with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and
thick darkness.

4:12 and the lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye
heard the voic of the words, but saw no similitude; onli ye heard a
voice.

4:13 and he declar unto you hi covenant, which he command you to
perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tabl of
stone.

4:14 and the lord command me at that time to teach you statut and
judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to
possess it.

4:15 take ye therefor good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner
of similitud on the day that the lord spake unto you in horeb out of
th midst of the fire: 4:16 lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a
graven image, the similitud of ani figure, the like of male or
female, 4:17 the like of ani beast that is on the earth, the
lik of ani wing fowl that flieth in the air, 4:18 the likeness
of ani thing that creepeth on the ground, the like of ani fish
that is in the water beneath the earth: 4:19 and lest thou lift up
thin eye unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and
th stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship
them, and serv them, which the lord thi god hath divid unto all
nat under the whole heaven.

4:20 but the lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the
iron furnace, even out of egypt, to be unto him a peopl of
inheritance, as ye are thi day.

4:21 furthermor the lord wa angri with me for your sakes, and sware
that I should not go over jordan, and that I should not go in unto
that good land, which the lord thi god giveth thee for an inheritance:
4:22 but I must die in thi land, I must not go over jordan: but ye
shal go over, and possess that good land.

4:23 take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the coven of the
lord your god, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or
th like of ani thing, which the lord thi god hath forbidden thee.

4:24 for the lord thi god is a consum fire, even a jealou god.

4:25 when thou shalt beget children, and children' children, and ye
shal have remain long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves,
and make a graven image, or the like of ani thing, and shall do
evil in the sight of the lord thi god, to provok him to anger: 4:26 i
cal heaven and earth to wit against you thi day, that ye shall
soon utterli perish from off the land whereunto ye go over jordan to
possess it; ye shall not prolong your day upon it, but shall utterly
b destroyed.

4:27 and the lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
left few in number among the heathen, whither the lord shall lead you.

4:28 and there ye shall serv gods, the work of men' hands, wood and
stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

4:29 but if from thenc thou shalt seek the lord thi god, thou shalt
find him, if thou seek him with all thi heart and with all thi soul.

4:30 when thou art in tribulation, and all these thing are come upon
thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the lord thi god, and
shalt be obedi unto hi voice; 4:31 (for the lord thi god is a
merci god;) he will not forsak thee, neither destroy thee, nor
forget the coven of thi father which he sware unto them.

4:32 for ask now of the day that are past, which were befor thee,
sinc the day that god creat man upon the earth, and ask from the
on side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been ani such
th as thi great thing is, or hath been heard like it?  4:33 did
ev peopl hear the voic of god speak out of the midst of the
fire, as thou hast heard, and live?  4:34 Or hath god assay to go
and take him a nation from the midst of anoth nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty
hand, and by a stretch out arm, and by great terrors, accord to
al that the lord your god did for you in egypt befor your eyes?
4:35 unto thee it wa shewed, that thou mightest know that the lord he
i god; there is none els besid him.

4:36 out of heaven he made thee to hear hi voice, that he might
instruct thee: and upon earth he shew thee hi great fire; and thou
heardest hi word out of the midst of the fire.

4:37 and becaus he love thi fathers, therefor he chose their seed
aft them, and brought thee out in hi sight with hi mighti power
out of egypt; 4:38 To drive out nation from befor thee greater and
mighti than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for
an inheritance, as it is thi day.

4:39 know therefor thi day, and consid it in thine heart, that the
lord he is god in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is
non else.

4:40 thou shalt keep therefor hi statutes, and hi commandments,
which I command thee thi day, that it may go well with thee, and with
thi children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thi day upon
th earth, which the lord thi god giveth thee, for ever.

4:41 then mose sever three citi on thi side jordan toward the
sunrising; 4:42 that the slayer might flee thither, which should kill
hi neighbour unawares, and hate him not in time past; and that
fle unto one of these citi he might live: 4:43 namely, bezer in
th wilderness, in the plain country, of the reubenites; and ramoth in
gilead, of the gadites; and golan in bashan, of the manassites.

4:44 and thi is the law which mose set befor the children of
israel: 4:45 these are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which mose spake unto the children of israel, after they
cam forth out of egypt.

4:46 On thi side jordan, in the valley over against bethpeor, in the
land of sihon king of the amorites, who dwelt at heshbon, whom moses
and the children of israel smote, after they were come forth out of
egypt: 4:47 and they possess hi land, and the land of Og king of
bashan, two king of the amorites, which were on thi side jordan
toward the sunrising; 4:48 from aroer, which is by the bank of the
riv arnon, even unto mount sion, which is hermon, 4:49 and all the
plain on thi side jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain,
und the spring of pisgah.

5:1 and mose call all israel, and said unto them, hear, O israel,
th statut and judgment which I speak in your ear thi day, that
y may learn them, and keep, and do them.

5:2 the lord our god made a coven with us in horeb.

5:3 the lord made not thi coven with our fathers, but with us,
even us, who are all of us here aliv thi day.

5:4 the lord talk with you face to face in the mount out of the
midst of the fire, 5:5 (I stood between the lord and you at that time,
to shew you the word of the lord: for ye were afraid by reason of the
fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying, 5:6 I am the lord thy
god, which brought thee out of the land of egypt, from the hous of
bondage.

5:7 thou shalt have none other god befor me.

5:8 thou shalt not make thee ani graven image, or ani like of any
th that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the water beneath the earth: 5:9 thou shalt not bow down
thyself unto them, nor serv them: for I the lord thi god am a jealous
god, visit the iniqu of the father upon the children unto the
third and fourth gener of them that hate me, 5:10 and shewing
merci unto thousand of them that love me and keep my commandments.

5:11 thou shalt not take the name of the lord thi god in vain: for the
lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh hi name in vain.

5:12 keep the sabbath day to sanctifi it, as the lord thi god hath
command thee.

5:13 six day thou shalt labour, and do all thi work: 5:14 but the
seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thi god: in it thou shalt not
do ani work, thou, nor thi son, nor thi daughter, nor thi manservant,
nor thi maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor ani of thy
cattle, nor thi stranger that is within thi gates; that thi manservant
and thi maidserv may rest as well as thou.

5:15 and rememb that thou wast a servant in the land of egypt, and
that the lord thi god brought thee out thenc through a mighti hand
and by a stretch out arm: therefor the lord thi god command thee
to keep the sabbath day.

5:16 honour thi father and thi mother, as the lord thi god hath
command thee; that thi day may be prolonged, and that it may go
wel with thee, in the land which the lord thi god giveth thee.

5:17 thou shalt not kill.

5:18 neither shalt thou commit adultery.

5:19 neither shalt thou steal.

5:20 neither shalt thou bear fals wit against thi neighbour.

5:21 neither shalt thou desir thi neighbour' wife, neither shalt
thou covet thi neighbour' house, hi field, or hi manservant, or his
maidservant, hi ox, or hi ass, or ani thing that is thi neighbour's.

5:22 these word the lord spake unto all your assembl in the mount
out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness,
with a great voice: and he ad no more. and he wrote them in two
tabl of stone, and deliv them unto me.

5:23 and it came to pass, when ye heard the voic out of the midst of
th darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near
unto me, even all the head of your tribes, and your elders; 5:24 and
y said, behold, the lord our god hath shew us hi glori and his
greatness, and we have heard hi voic out of the midst of the fire:
w have seen thi day that god doth talk with man, and he liveth.

5:25 now therefor whi should we die? for thi great fire will consume
us: if we hear the voic of the lord our god ani more, then we shall
die.

5:26 for who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voic of the
liv god speak out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and
lived?  5:27 Go thou near, and hear all that the lord our god shall
say: and speak thou unto us all that the lord our god shall speak unto
thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

5:28 and the lord heard the voic of your words, when ye spake unto
me; and the lord said unto me, I have heard the voic of the word of
thi people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all
that they have spoken.

5:29 O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my command always, that it might be well with them,
and with their children for ever!  5:30 Go say to them, get you into
your tent again.

5:31 but as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto
the all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give
them to possess it.

5:32 Ye shall observ to do therefor as the lord your god hath
command you: ye shall not turn asid to the right hand or to the
left.

5:33 Ye shall walk in all the way which the lord your god hath
command you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and
that ye may prolong your day in the land which ye shall possess.

6:1 now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments,
which the lord your god command to teach you, that ye might do them
in the land whither ye go to possess it: 6:2 that thou mightest fear
th lord thi god, to keep all hi statut and hi commandments, which
i command thee, thou, and thi son, and thi son' son, all the day of
thi life; and that thi day may be prolonged.

6:3 hear therefore, O israel, and observ to do it; that it may be
wel with thee, and that ye may increas mightily, as the lord god of
thi father hath promis thee, in the land that floweth with milk and
honey.

6:4 hear, O israel: the lord our god is one lord: 6:5 and thou shalt
lov the lord thi god with all thine heart, and with all thi soul, and
with all thi might.

6:6 and these words, which I command thee thi day, shall be in thine
heart: 6:7 and thou shalt teach them dilig unto thi children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shal be as frontlet between thine eyes.

6:9 and thou shalt write them upon the post of thi house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 and it shall be, when the lord thi god shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thi fathers, to abraham, to isaac,
and to jacob, to give thee great and goodli cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 and hous full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and well digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyard and
ol trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
b full; 6:12 then bewar lest thou forget the lord, which brought
the forth out of the land of egypt, from the hous of bondage.

6:13 thou shalt fear the lord thi god, and serv him, and shalt swear
bi hi name.

6:14 Ye shall not go after other gods, of the god of the peopl which
ar round about you; 6:15 (for the lord thi god is a jealou god among
you) lest the anger of the lord thi god be kindl against thee, and
destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

6:16 Ye shall not tempt the lord your god, as ye tempt him in
massah.

6:17 Ye shall dilig keep the command of the lord your god,
and hi testimonies, and hi statutes, which he hath command thee.

6:18 and thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of
th lord: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in
and possess the good land which the lord sware unto thi fathers.

6:19 To cast out all thine enemi from befor thee, as the lord hath
spoken.

6:20 and when thi son asketh thee in time to come, saying, what mean
th testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the lord
our god hath command you?  6:21 then thou shalt say unto thi son, we
wer pharaoh' bondmen in egypt; and the lord brought us out of egypt
with a mighti hand: 6:22 and the lord shew sign and wonders, great
and sore, upon egypt, upon pharaoh, and upon all hi household, before
our eyes: 6:23 and he brought us out from thence, that he might bring
u in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.

6:24 and the lord command us to do all these statutes, to fear the
lord our god, for our good always, that he might preserv us alive, as
it is at thi day.

6:25 and it shall be our righteousness, if we observ to do all these
command befor the lord our god, as he hath command us.

7:1 when the lord thi god shall bring thee into the land whither thou
goest to possess it, and hath cast out mani nation befor thee, the
hittites, and the girgashites, and the amorites, and the canaanites,
and the perizzites, and the hivites, and the jebusites, seven nations
great and mightier than thou; 7:2 and when the lord thi god shall
deliv them befor thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterli destroy
them; thou shalt make no coven with them, nor shew merci unto them:
7:3 neither shalt thou make marriag with them; thi daughter thou
shalt not give unto hi son, nor hi daughter shalt thou take unto thy
son.

7:4 for they will turn away thi son from follow me, that they may
serv other gods: so will the anger of the lord be kindl against
you, and destroy thee suddenly.

7:5 but thu shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars,
and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
graven imag with fire.

7:6 for thou art an holi peopl unto the lord thi god: the lord thy
god hath chosen thee to be a special peopl unto himself, abov all
peopl that are upon the face of the earth.

7:7 the lord did not set hi love upon you, nor choos you, becaus ye
wer more in number than ani people; for ye were the fewest of all
people: 7:8 but becaus the lord love you, and becaus he would keep
th oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the lord brought
you out with a mighti hand, and redeem you out of the hous of
bondmen, from the hand of pharaoh king of egypt.

7:9 know therefor that the lord thi god, he is god, the faith god,
which keepeth coven and merci with them that love him and keep his
command to a thousand generations; 7:10 and repayeth them that
hat him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him
that hateth him, he will repay him to hi face.

7:11 thou shalt therefor keep the commandments, and the statutes, and
th judgments, which I command thee thi day, to do them.

7:12 wherefor it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these
judgments, and keep, and do them, that the lord thi god shall keep
unto thee the coven and the merci which he sware unto thi fathers:
7:13 and he will love thee, and bless thee, and multipli thee: he will
also bless the fruit of thi womb, and the fruit of thi land, thi corn,
and thi wine, and thine oil, the increas of thi kine, and the flocks
of thi sheep, in the land which he sware unto thi father to give
thee.

7:14 thou shalt be bless abov all people: there shall not be male
or femal barren among you, or among your cattle.

7:15 and the lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
non of the evil diseas of egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but
wil lay them upon all them that hate thee.

7:16 and thou shalt consum all the peopl which the lord thi god
shal deliv thee; thine eye shall have no piti upon them: neither
shalt thou serv their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.

7:17 If thou shalt say in thine heart, these nation are more than i;
how can I dispossess them?  7:18 thou shalt not be afraid of them: but
shalt well rememb what the lord thi god did unto pharaoh, and unto
al egypt; 7:19 the great temptat which thine eye saw, and the
signs, and the wonders, and the mighti hand, and the stretch out
arm, wherebi the lord thi god brought thee out: so shall the lord thy
god do unto all the peopl of whom thou art afraid.

7:20 moreov the lord thi god will send the hornet among them, until
they that are left, and hide themselv from thee, be destroyed.

7:21 thou shalt not be affright at them: for the lord thi god is
among you, a mighti god and terrible.

7:22 and the lord thi god will put out those nation befor thee by
littl and little: thou mayest not consum them at once, lest the
beast of the field increas upon thee.

7:23 but the lord thi god shall deliv them unto thee, and shall
destroy them with a mighti destruction, until they be destroyed.

7:24 and he shall deliv their king into thine hand, and thou shalt
destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be abl to
stand befor thee, until thou have destroy them.

7:25 the graven imag of their god shall ye burn with fire: thou
shalt not desir the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto
thee, lest thou be snare therin: for it is an abomin to the lord
thi god.

7:26 neither shalt thou bring an abomin into thine house, lest
thou be a curs thing like it: but thou shalt utterli detest it, and
thou shalt utterli abhor it; for it is a curs thing.

8:1 all the command which I command thee thi day shall ye
observ to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess
th land which the lord sware unto your fathers.

8:2 and thou shalt rememb all the way which the lord thi god led
the these forti year in the wilderness, to humbl thee, and to prove
thee, to know what wa in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his
commandments, or no.

8:3 and he humbl thee, and suffer thee to hunger, and fed thee
with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thi father know; that
h might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by
everi word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the lord doth man live.

8:4 thi raiment wax not old upon thee, neither did thi foot swell,
thes forti years.

8:5 thou shalt also consid in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth
hi son, so the lord thi god chasteneth thee.

8:6 therefor thou shalt keep the command of the lord thi god, to
walk in hi ways, and to fear him.

8:7 for the lord thi god bringeth thee into a good land, a land of
brook of water, of fountain and depth that spring out of valleys
and hills; 8:8 A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees,
and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey; 8:9 A land wherein
th shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack ani thing
in it; a land whose stone are iron, and out of whose hill thou
mayest dig brass.

8:10 when thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the lord
thi god for the good land which he hath given thee.

8:11 bewar that thou forget not the lord thi god, in not keep his
commandments, and hi judgments, and hi statutes, which I command
the thi day: 8:12 lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast
built goodli houses, and dwelt therein; 8:13 and when thi herd and
thi flock multiply, and thi silver and thi gold is multiplied, and
al that thou hast is multiplied; 8:14 then thine heart be lift up,
and thou forget the lord thi god, which brought thee forth out of the
land of egypt, from the hous of bondage; 8:15 who led thee through
that great and terribl wilderness, wherein were fieri serpents, and
scorpions, and drought, where there wa no water; who brought thee
forth water out of the rock of flint; 8:16 who fed thee in the
wild with manna, which thi father knew not, that he might
humbl thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy
latt end; 8:17 and thou say in thine heart, My power and the might
of mine hand hath gotten me thi wealth.

8:18 but thou shalt rememb the lord thi god: for it is he that
giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish hi covenant
which he sware unto thi fathers, as it is thi day.

8:19 and it shall be, if thou do at all forget the lord thi god, and
walk after other gods, and serv them, and worship them, I testify
against you thi day that ye shall sure perish.

8:20 As the nation which the lord destroyeth befor your face, so
shal ye perish; becaus ye would not be obedi unto the voic of
th lord your god.

9:1 hear, O israel: thou art to pass over jordan thi day, to go in to
possess nation greater and mightier than thyself, citi great and
fenc up to heaven, 9:2 A peopl great and tall, the children of the
anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, who can
stand befor the children of anak!  9:3 understand therefor thi day,
that the lord thi god is he which goeth over befor thee; as a
consum fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down
befor thi face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them
quickly, as the lord hath said unto thee.

9:4 speak not thou in thine heart, after that the lord thi god hath
cast them out from befor thee, saying, for my righteous the lord
hath brought me in to possess thi land: but for the wicked of
thes nation the lord doth drive them out from befor thee.

9:5 not for thi righteousness, or for the upright of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wicked of these
n the lord thi god doth drive them out from befor thee, and
that he may perform the word which the lord sware unto thi fathers,
abraham, isaac, and jacob.

9:6 understand therefore, that the lord thi god giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thi righteousness; for thou art a
stiffneck people.

9:7 remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the lord thi god to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
th land of egypt, until ye came unto thi place, ye have been
rebelli against the lord.

9:8 also in horeb ye provok the lord to wrath, so that the lord was
angri with you to have destroy you.

9:9 when I wa gone up into the mount to receiv the tabl of stone,
even the tabl of the coven which the lord made with you, then i
abod in the mount forti day and forti nights, I neither did eat
bread nor drink water: 9:10 and the lord deliv unto me two tables
of stone written with the finger of god; and on them wa written
accord to all the words, which the lord spake with you in the mount
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.

9:11 and it came to pass at the end of forti day and forti nights,
that the lord gave me the two tabl of stone, even the tabl of the
covenant.

9:12 and the lord said unto me, arise, get thee down quickli from
hence; for thi peopl which thou hast brought forth out of egypt have
corrupt themselves; they are quickli turn asid out of the way
which I command them; they have made them a molten image.

9:13 furthermor the lord spake unto me, saying, I have seen this
people, and, behold, it is a stiffneck people: 9:14 let me alone,
that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven:
and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.

9:15 So I turn and came down from the mount, and the mount burned
with fire: and the two tabl of the coven were in my two hands.

9:16 and I looked, and, behold, ye had sin against the lord your
god, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turn asid quickli out
of the way which the lord had command you.

9:17 and I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and
brak them befor your eyes.

9:18 and I fell down befor the lord, as at the first, forti day and
forti nights: I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, becaus of all
your sin which ye sinned, in do wickedli in the sight of the lord,
to provok him to anger.

9:19 for I wa afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the
lord wa wroth against you to destroy you. but the lord hearken unto
m at that time also.

9:20 and the lord wa veri angri with aaron to have destroy him: and
i pray for aaron also the same time.

9:21 and I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it
with fire, and stamp it, and ground it veri small, even until it was
a small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that
descend out of the mount.

9:22 and at taberah, and at massah, and at kibrothhattaavah, ye
provok the lord to wrath.

9:23 likewis when the lord sent you from kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up
and possess the land which I have given you; then ye rebel against
th command of the lord your god, and ye believ him not, nor
hearken to hi voice.

9:24 Ye have been rebelli against the lord from the day that I knew
you.

9:25 thu I fell down befor the lord forti day and forti nights, as
i fell down at the first; becaus the lord had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 I pray therefor unto the lord, and said, O lord god, destroy
not thi peopl and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeem through
thi greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of egypt with a
mighti hand.

9:27 rememb thi servants, abraham, isaac, and jacob; look not unto
th stubborn of thi people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin: 9:28 lest the land whenc thou broughtest us out say, becaus the
lord wa not abl to bring them into the land which he promis them,
and becaus he hate them, he hath brought them out to slay them in
th wilderness.

9:29 yet they are thi peopl and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest out by thi mighti power and by thi stretch out arm.

10:1 At that time the lord said unto me, hew thee two tabl of stone
lik unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee
an ark of wood.

10:2 and I will write on the tabl the word that were in the first
tabl which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.

10:3 and I made an ark of shittim wood, and hew two tabl of stone
lik unto the first, and went up into the mount, have the two tables
in mine hand.

10:4 and he wrote on the tables, accord to the first writing, the
ten commandments, which the lord spake unto you in the mount out of
th midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the lord gave
them unto me.

10:5 and I turn myself and came down from the mount, and put the
tabl in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the lord
command me.

10:6 and the children of israel took their journey from beeroth of the
children of jaakan to mosera: there aaron died, and there he was
buried; and eleazar hi son minist in the priest' offic in his
stead.

10:7 from thenc they journey unto gudgodah; and from gudgodah to
jotbath, a land of river of waters.

10:8 At that time the lord separ the tribe of levi, to bear the
ark of the coven of the lord, to stand befor the lord to minister
unto him, and to bless in hi name, unto thi day.

10:9 wherefor levi hath no part nor inherit with hi brethren;
th lord is hi inheritance, accord as the lord thi god promised
him.

10:10 and I stay in the mount, accord to the first time, forty
day and forti nights; and the lord hearken unto me at that time
also, and the lord would not destroy thee.

10:11 and the lord said unto me, arise, take thi journey befor the
people, that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto
their father to give unto them.

10:12 and now, israel, what doth the lord thi god requir of thee, but
to fear the lord thi god, to walk in all hi ways, and to love him,
and to serv the lord thi god with all thi heart and with all thy
soul, 10:13 To keep the command of the lord, and hi statutes,
which I command thee thi day for thi good?  10:14 behold, the heaven
and the heaven of heaven is the lord' thi god, the earth also, with
al that therein is.

10:15 onli the lord had a delight in thi father to love them, and he
chos their seed after them, even you abov all people, as it is this
day.

10:16 circumcis therefor the foreskin of your heart, and be no more
stiffnecked.

10:17 for the lord your god is god of gods, and lord of lords, a great
god, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh
reward: 10:18 He doth execut the judgment of the fatherless and
widow, and loveth the stranger, in give him food and raiment.

10:19 love ye therefor the stranger: for ye were stranger in the
land of egypt.

10:20 thou shalt fear the lord thi god; him shalt thou serve, and to
him shalt thou cleave, and swear by hi name.

10:21 He is thi praise, and he is thi god, that hath done for thee
thes great and terribl things, which thine eye have seen.

10:22 thi father went down into egypt with threescor and ten
persons; and now the lord thi god hath made thee as the star of
heaven for multitude.

11:1 therefor thou shalt love the lord thi god, and keep hi charge,
and hi statutes, and hi judgments, and hi commandments, alway.

11:2 and know ye thi day: for I speak not with your children which
hav not known, and which have not seen the chastis of the lord
your god, hi greatness, hi mighti hand, and hi stretch out arm,
11:3 and hi miracles, and hi acts, which he did in the midst of
egypt unto pharaoh the king of egypt, and unto all hi land; 11:4 and
what he did unto the armi of egypt, unto their horses, and to their
chariots; how he made the water of the red sea to overflow them as
they pursu after you, and how the lord hath destroy them unto this
day; 11:5 and what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came
into thi place; 11:6 and what he did unto dathan and abiram, the sons
of eliab, the son of reuben: how the earth open her mouth, and
swallow them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the
subst that wa in their possession, in the midst of all israel:
11:7 but your eye have seen all the great act of the lord which he
did.

11:8 therefor shall ye keep all the command which I command you
thi day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land,
whith ye go to possess it; 11:9 and that ye may prolong your day in
th land, which the lord sware unto your father to give unto them and
to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

11:10 for the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the
land of egypt, from whenc ye came out, where thou sowedst thi seed,
and wateredst it with thi foot, as a garden of herbs: 11:11 but the
land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hill and valleys, and
drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 11:12 A land which the lord thy
god careth for: the eye of the lord thi god are alway upon it, from
th begin of the year even unto the end of the year.

11:13 and it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken dilig unto
mi command which I command you thi day, to love the lord your
god, and to serv him with all your heart and with all your soul,
11:14 that I will give you the rain of your land in hi due season,
th first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy
corn, and thi wine, and thine oil.

11:15 and I will send grass in thi field for thi cattle, that thou
mayest eat and be full.

11:16 take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye
turn aside, and serv other gods, and worship them; 11:17 and then the
lord' wrath be kindl against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
ther be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye
perish quickli from off the good land which the lord giveth you.

11:18 therefor shall ye lay up these my word in your heart and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be
a frontlet between your eyes.

11:19 and ye shall teach them your children, speak of them when
thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when
thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

11:20 and thou shalt write them upon the door post of thine house,
and upon thi gates: 11:21 that your day may be multiplied, and the
day of your children, in the land which the lord sware unto your
fath to give them, as the day of heaven upon the earth.

11:22 for if ye shall dilig keep all these command which i
command you, to do them, to love the lord your god, to walk in all his
ways, and to cleav unto him; 11:23 then will the lord drive out all
thes nation from befor you, and ye shall possess greater nations
and mightier than yourselves.

11:24 everi place whereon the sole of your feet shall tread shall be
yours: from the wilder and lebanon, from the river, the river
euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.

11:25 there shall no man be abl to stand befor you: for the lord
your god shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the
land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

11:26 behold, I set befor you thi day a bless and a curse; 11:27
a blessing, if ye obey the command of the lord your god, which i
command you thi day: 11:28 and a curse, if ye will not obey the
command of the lord your god, but turn asid out of the way which
i command you thi day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.

11:29 and it shall come to pass, when the lord thi god hath brought
the in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou
shalt put the bless upon mount gerizim, and the curs upon mount
ebal.

11:30 are they not on the other side jordan, by the way where the sun
goeth down, in the land of the canaanites, which dwell in the
champaign over against gilgal, besid the plain of moreh?  11:31 for
y shall pass over jordan to go in to possess the land which the lord
your god giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.

11:32 and ye shall observ to do all the statut and judgment which
i set befor you thi day.

12:1 these are the statut and judgments, which ye shall observ to
do in the land, which the lord god of thi father giveth thee to
possess it, all the day that ye live upon the earth.

12:2 Ye shall utterli destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess serv their gods, upon the high mountains, and
upon the hills, and under everi green tree: 12:3 and ye shall
overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves
with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven imag of their gods, and
destroy the name of them out of that place.

12:4 Ye shall not do so unto the lord your god.

12:5 but unto the place which the lord your god shall choos out of
al your tribe to put hi name there, even unto hi habit shall
y seek, and thither thou shalt come: 12:6 and thither ye shall bring
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave
off of your hand, and your vows, and your freewil offerings,
and the firstl of your herd and of your flocks: 12:7 and there ye
shal eat befor the lord your god, and ye shall rejoic in all that
y put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the lord thy
god hath bless thee.

12:8 Ye shall not do after all the thing that we do here thi day,
everi man whatsoev is right in hi own eyes.

12:9 for ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance,
which the lord your god giveth you.

12:10 but when ye go over jordan, and dwell in the land which the lord
your god giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
your enemi round about, so that ye dwell in safety; 12:11 then there
shal be a place which the lord your god shall choos to caus his
nam to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you;
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave
off of your hand, and all your choic vow which ye vow unto the
lord: 12:12 and ye shall rejoic befor the lord your god, ye, and
your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your
maidservants, and the levit that is within your gates; forasmuch as
h hath no part nor inherit with you.

12:13 take heed to thyself that thou offer not thi burnt offer in
everi place that thou seest: 12:14 but in the place which the lord
shal choos in one of thi tribes, there thou shalt offer thi burnt
offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

12:15 notwithstand thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thi gates,
whatsoev thi soul lusteth after, accord to the bless of the
lord thi god which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may
eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

12:16 onli ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth
a water.

12:17 thou mayest not eat within thi gate the tith of thi corn, or
of thi wine, or of thi oil, or the firstl of thi herd or of thy
flock, nor ani of thi vow which thou vowest, nor thi freewill
offerings, or heav offer of thine hand: 12:18 but thou must eat
them befor the lord thi god in the place which the lord thi god shall
choose, thou, and thi son, and thi daughter, and thi manservant, and
thi maidservant, and the levit that is within thi gates: and thou
shalt rejoic befor the lord thi god in all that thou puttest thine
hand unto.

12:19 take heed to thyself that thou forsak not the levit as long as
thou livest upon the earth.

12:20 when the lord thi god shall enlarg thi border, as he hath
promis thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, becaus thi soul
longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoev thi soul
lusteth after.

12:21 If the place which the lord thi god hath chosen to put hi name
ther be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thi herd and of
thi flock, which the lord hath given thee, as I have command thee,
and thou shalt eat in thi gate whatsoev thi soul lusteth after.

12:22 even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat
them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.

12:23 onli be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the
life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.

12:24 thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as
water.

12:25 thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with
thi children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
sight of the lord.

12:26 onli thi holi thing which thou hast, and thi vows, thou shalt
take, and go unto the place which the lord shall choose: 12:27 and
thou shalt offer thi burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon
th altar of the lord thi god: and the blood of thi sacrific shall
b pour out upon the altar of the lord thi god, and thou shalt eat
th flesh.

12:28 observ and hear all these word which I command thee, that it
may go well with thee, and with thi children after thee for ever, when
thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the lord thy
god.

12:29 when the lord thi god shall cut off the nation from before
thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them,
and dwellest in their land; 12:30 take heed to thyself that thou be
not snare by follow them, after that they be destroy from before
thee; and that thou enquir not after their gods, saying, how did
thes nation serv their gods? even so will I do likewise.

12:31 thou shalt not do so unto the lord thi god: for every
abomin to the lord, which he hateth, have they done unto their
gods; for even their son and their daughter they have burnt in the
fir to their gods.

12:32 what thing soever I command you, observ to do it: thou shalt
not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

13:1 If there aris among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, 13:2 and the sign or the wonder come
to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, let us go after other
gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serv them; 13:3 thou
shalt not hearken unto the word of that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for the lord your god proveth you, to know whether ye love the
lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul.

13:4 Ye shall walk after the lord your god, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey hi voice, and ye shall serv him, and cleave
unto him.

13:5 and that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to
death; becaus he hath spoken to turn you away from the lord your god,
which brought you out of the land of egypt, and redeem you out of
th hous of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the lord thy
god command thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from
th midst of thee.

13:6 If thi brother, the son of thi mother, or thi son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thi bosom, or thi friend, which is as thine
own soul, entic thee secretly, saying, let us go and serv other
gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thi fathers; 13:7 namely,
of the god of the peopl which are round about you, nigh unto thee,
or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the
oth end of the earth; 13:8 thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye piti him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: 13:9 but thou shalt sure kill
him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterward the hand of all the people.

13:10 and thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; becaus he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the lord thi god, which brought
the out of the land of egypt, from the hous of bondage.

13:11 and all israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wicked as thi is among you.

13:12 If thou shalt hear say in one of thi cities, which the lord thy
god hath given thee to dwell there, saying, 13:13 certain men, the
children of belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn
th inhabit of their city, saying, let us go and serv other gods,
which ye have not known; 13:14 then shalt thou enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomin is wrought among you; 13:15 thou shalt
sur smite the inhabit of that citi with the edg of the sword,
destroy it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle
thereof, with the edg of the sword.

13:16 and thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
thereof everi whit, for the lord thi god: and it shall be an heap for
ever; it shall not be built again.

13:17 and there shall cleav nought of the curs thing to thine hand:
that the lord may turn from the fierc of hi anger, and shew thee
mercy, and have compass upon thee, and multipli thee, as he hath
sworn unto thi fathers; 13:18 when thou shalt hearken to the voic of
th lord thi god, to keep all hi command which I command thee
thi day, to do that which is right in the eye of the lord thi god.

14:1 Ye are the children of the lord your god: ye shall not cut
yourselves, nor make ani bald between your eye for the dead.

14:2 for thou art an holi peopl unto the lord thi god, and the lord
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar peopl unto himself, abov all the
nat that are upon the earth.

14:3 thou shalt not eat ani abomin thing.

14:4 these are the beast which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and
th goat, 14:5 the hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the
wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.

14:6 and everi beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall
eat.

14:7 nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divid the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and
th coney: for they chew the cud, but divid not the hoof; therefore
they are unclean unto you.

14:8 and the swine, becaus it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the
cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor
touch their dead carcase.

14:9 these ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have
fin and scale shall ye eat: 14:10 and whatsoev hath not fin and
scal ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you.

14:11 Of all clean bird ye shall eat.

14:12 but these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the
ossifrage, and the ospray, 14:13 and the glede, and the kite, and the
vultur after hi kind, 14:14 and everi raven after hi kind, 14:15
and the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after
hi kind, 14:16 the littl owl, and the great owl, and the swan, 14:17
and the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant, 14:18 and the
stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

14:19 and everi creep thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they
shal not be eaten.

14:20 but of all clean fowl ye may eat.

14:21 Ye shall not eat of anyth that dieth of itself: thou shalt
giv it unto the stranger that is in thi gates, that he may eat it; or
thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holi peopl unto
th lord thi god.

thou shalt not seeth a kid in hi mother' milk.

14:22 thou shalt truli tith all the increas of thi seed, that the
field bringeth forth year by year.

14:23 and thou shalt eat befor the lord thi god, in the place which
h shall choos to place hi name there, the tith of thi corn, of thy
wine, and of thine oil, and the firstl of thi herd and of thy
flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the lord thi god always.

14:24 and if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able
to carri it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the lord thy
god shall choos to set hi name there, when the lord thi god hath
bless thee: 14:25 then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up
th money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the lord
thi god shall choose: 14:26 and thou shalt bestow that money for
whatsoev thi soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for
wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoev thi soul desireth: and
thou shalt eat there befor the lord thi god, and thou shalt rejoice,
thou, and thine household, 14:27 and the levit that is within thy
gates; thou shalt not forsak him; for he hath no part nor inheritance
with thee.

14:28 At the end of three year thou shalt bring forth all the tithe
of thine increas the same year, and shalt lay it up within thi gates:
14:29 and the levite, (becaus he hath no part nor inherit with
thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are
within thi gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the
lord thi god may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou
doest.

15:1 At the end of everi seven year thou shalt make a release.

15:2 and thi is the manner of the release: everi creditor that
lendeth ought unto hi neighbour shall releas it; he shall not exact
it of hi neighbour, or of hi brother; becaus it is call the
lord' release.

15:3 Of a foreign thou mayest exact it again: but that which is
thin with thi brother thine hand shall release; 15:4 save when there
shal be no poor among you; for the lord shall greatli bless thee in
th land which the lord thi god giveth thee for an inherit to
possess it: 15:5 onli if thou care hearken unto the voic of the
lord thi god, to observ to do all these command which I command
the thi day.

15:6 for the lord thi god blesseth thee, as he promis thee: and thou
shalt lend unto mani nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou
shalt reign over mani nations, but they shall not reign over thee.

15:7 If there be among you a poor man of one of thi brethren within
ani of thi gate in thi land which the lord thi god giveth thee, thou
shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thi poor
brother: 15:8 but thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt
sur lend him suffici for hi need, in that which he wanteth.

15:9 bewar that there be not a thought in thi wick heart, saying,
th seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be
evil against thi poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry
unto the lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

15:10 thou shalt sure give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou givest unto him: becaus that for thi thing the lord thy
god shall bless thee in all thi works, and in all that thou puttest
thin hand unto.

15:11 for the poor shall never ceas out of the land: therefor i
command thee, saying, thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy
brother, to thi poor, and to thi needy, in thi land.

15:12 and if thi brother, an hebrew man, or an hebrew woman, be sold
unto thee, and serv thee six years; then in the seventh year thou
shalt let him go free from thee.

15:13 and when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let
him go away empty: 15:14 thou shalt furnish him liber out of thy
flock, and out of thi floor, and out of thi winepress: of that
wherewith the lord thi god hath bless thee thou shalt give unto him.

15:15 and thou shalt rememb that thou wast a bondman in the land of
egypt, and the lord thi god redeem thee: therefor I command thee
thi thing to day.

15:16 and it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from
thee; becaus he loveth thee and thine house, becaus he is well with
thee; 15:17 then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through hi ear
unto the door, and he shall be thi servant for ever. and also unto thy
maidserv thou shalt do likewise.

15:18 It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away
fre from thee; for he hath been worth a doubl hire servant to thee,
in serv thee six years: and the lord thi god shall bless thee in
al that thou doest.

15:19 all the firstl male that come of thi herd and of thi flock
thou shalt sanctifi unto the lord thi god: thou shalt do no work with
th firstl of thi bullock, nor shear the firstl of thi sheep.

15:20 thou shalt eat it befor the lord thi god year by year in the
plac which the lord shall choose, thou and thi household.

15:21 and if there be ani blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind,
or have ani ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrific it unto the lord thy
god.

15:22 thou shalt eat it within thi gates: the unclean and the clean
person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.

15:23 onli thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it
upon the ground as water.

16:1 observ the month of abib, and keep the passov unto the lord
thi god: for in the month of abib the lord thi god brought thee forth
out of egypt by night.

16:2 thou shalt therefor sacrific the passov unto the lord thy
god, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the lord shall
choos to place hi name there.

16:3 thou shalt eat no leaven bread with it; seven day shalt thou
eat unleaven bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou
camest forth out of the land of egypt in haste: that thou mayest
rememb the day when thou camest forth out of the land of egypt all
th day of thi life.

16:4 and there shall be no leaven bread seen with thee in all thy
coast seven days; neither shall there ani thing of the flesh, which
thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the
morning.

16:5 thou mayest not sacrific the passov within ani of thi gates,
which the lord thi god giveth thee: 16:6 but at the place which the
lord thi god shall choos to place hi name in, there thou shalt
sacrific the passov at even, at the go down of the sun, at the
season that thou camest forth out of egypt.

16:7 and thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the lord thy
god shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy
tents.

16:8 six day thou shalt eat unleaven bread: and on the seventh day
shal be a solemn assembl to the lord thi god: thou shalt do no work
therein.

16:9 seven week shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the
seven week from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickl to the
corn.

16:10 and thou shalt keep the feast of week unto the lord thi god
with a tribut of a freewil offer of thine hand, which thou shalt
giv unto the lord thi god, accord as the lord thi god hath blessed
thee: 16:11 and thou shalt rejoic befor the lord thi god, thou, and
thi son, and thi daughter, and thi manservant, and thi maidservant,
and the levit that is within thi gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the
lord thi god hath chosen to place hi name there.

16:12 and thou shalt rememb that thou wast a bondman in egypt: and
thou shalt observ and do these statutes.

16:13 thou shalt observ the feast of tabernacl seven days, after
that thou hast gather in thi corn and thi wine: 16:14 and thou shalt
rejoic in thi feast, thou, and thi son, and thi daughter, and thy
manservant, and thi maidservant, and the levite, the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thi gates.

16:15 seven day shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the lord thi god
in the place which the lord shall choose: becaus the lord thi god
shal bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the work of thine
hands, therefor thou shalt sure rejoice.

16:16 three time in a year shall all thi male appear befor the lord
thi god in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and
they shall not appear befor the lord empty: 16:17 everi man shall
giv as he is able, accord to the bless of the lord thi god
which he hath given thee.

16:18 judg and offic shalt thou make thee in all thi gates, which
th lord thi god giveth thee, throughout thi tribes: and they shall
judg the peopl with just judgment.

16:19 thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
neith take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eye of the wise, and
pervert the word of the righteous.

16:20 that which is altogeth just shalt thou follow, that thou
mayest live, and inherit the land which the lord thi god giveth thee.

16:21 thou shalt not plant thee a grove of ani tree near unto the
altar of the lord thi god, which thou shalt make thee.

16:22 neither shalt thou set thee up ani image; which the lord thi god
hateth.

17:1 thou shalt not sacrific unto the lord thi god ani bullock, or
sheep, wherein is blemish, or ani evilfavouredness: for that is an
abomin unto the lord thi god.

17:2 If there be found among you, within ani of thi gate which the
lord thi god giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness
in the sight of the lord thi god, in transgress hi covenant, 17:3
and hath gone and serv other gods, and worship them, either the
sun, or moon, or ani of the host of heaven, which I have not
commanded; 17:4 and it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and
enquir diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain,
that such abomin is wrought in israel: 17:5 then shalt thou bring
forth that man or that woman, which have commit that wick thing,
unto thi gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with
stones, till they die.

17:6 At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that
i worthi of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one wit he
shal not be put to death.

17:7 the hand of the wit shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hand of all the people. So thou shalt put
th evil away from among you.

17:8 If there aris a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
b matter of controversi within thi gates: then shalt thou arise,
and get thee up into the place which the lord thi god shall choose;
17:9 and thou shalt come unto the priest the levites, and unto the
judg that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew
the the sentenc of judgment: 17:10 and thou shalt do accord to
th sentence, which they of that place which the lord shall choose
shal shew thee; and thou shalt observ to do accord to all that
they inform thee: 17:11 accord to the sentenc of the law which
they shall teach thee, and accord to the judgment which they shall
tel thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not declin from the sentence
which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

17:12 and the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken
unto the priest that standeth to minist there befor the lord thy
god, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put
away the evil from israel.

17:13 and all the peopl shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

17:14 when thou art come unto the land which the lord thi god giveth
thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, i
wil set a king over me, like as all the nation that are about me;
17:15 thou shalt in ani wise set him king over thee, whom the lord thy
god shall choose: one from among thi brethren shalt thou set king over
thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother.

17:16 but he shall not multipli hors to himself, nor caus the
peopl to return to egypt, to the end that he should multipli horses:
forasmuch as the lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return
no more that way.

17:17 neither shall he multipli wive to himself, that hi heart turn
not away: neither shall he greatli multipli to himself silver and
gold.

17:18 and it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of hi kingdom,
that he shall write him a copi of thi law in a book out of that which
i befor the priest the levites: 17:19 and it shall be with him, and
h shall read therein all the day of hi life: that he may learn to
fear the lord hi god, to keep all the word of thi law and these
statutes, to do them: 17:20 that hi heart be not lift up abov his
brethren, and that he turn not asid from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong hi day in
hi kingdom, he, and hi children, in the midst of israel.

18:1 the priest the levites, and all the tribe of levi, shall have no
part nor inherit with israel: they shall eat the offer of the
lord made by fire, and hi inheritance.

18:2 therefor shall they have no inherit among their brethren:
th lord is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.

18:3 and thi shall be the priest' due from the people, from them
that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give
unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.

18:4 the firstfruit also of thi corn, of thi wine, and of thine oil,
and the first of the fleec of thi sheep, shalt thou give him.

18:5 for the lord thi god hath chosen him out of all thi tribes, to
stand to minist in the name of the lord, him and hi son for ever.

18:6 and if a levit come from ani of thi gate out of all israel,
wher he sojourned, and come with all the desir of hi mind unto the
plac which the lord shall choose; 18:7 then he shall minist in the
nam of the lord hi god, as all hi brethren the levit do, which
stand there befor the lord.

18:8 they shall have like portion to eat, besid that which cometh of
th sale of hi patrimony.

18:9 when thou art come into the land which the lord thi god giveth
thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abomin of those
nations.

18:10 there shall not be found among you ani one that maketh hi son
or hi daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or
an observ of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.

18:11 Or a charmer, or a consult with familiar spirits, or a wizard,
or a necromancer.

18:12 for all that do these thing are an abomin unto the lord:
and becaus of these abomin the lord thi god doth drive them out
from befor thee.

18:13 thou shalt be perfect with the lord thi god.

18:14 for these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearken unto
observ of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the lord thy
god hath not suffer thee so to do.

18:15 the lord thi god will rais up unto thee a prophet from the
midst of thee, of thi brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall
hearken; 18:16 accord to all that thou desiredst of the lord thy
god in horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, let me not hear again
th voic of the lord my god, neither let me see thi great fire any
more, that I die not.

18:17 and the lord said unto me, they have well spoken that which they
hav spoken.

18:18 I will rais them up a prophet from among their brethren, like
unto thee, and will put my word in hi mouth; and he shall speak unto
them all that I shall command him.

18:19 and it shall come to pass, that whosoev will not hearken unto
mi word which he shall speak in my name, I will requir it of him.

18:20 but the prophet, which shall presum to speak a word in my name,
which I have not command him to speak, or that shall speak in the
nam of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

18:21 and if thou say in thine heart, how shall we know the word which
th lord hath not spoken?  18:22 when a prophet speaketh in the name
of the lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
th which the lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

19:1 when the lord thi god hath cut off the nations, whose land the
lord thi god giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in
their cities, and in their houses; 19:2 thou shalt separ three
citi for thee in the midst of thi land, which the lord thi god
giveth thee to possess it.

19:3 thou shalt prepar thee a way, and divid the coast of thi land,
which the lord thi god giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that
everi slayer may flee thither.

19:4 and thi is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither,
that he may live: whoso killeth hi neighbour ignorantly, whom he
hat not in time past; 19:5 As when a man goeth into the wood with
hi neighbour to hew wood, and hi hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe
to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and
lighteth upon hi neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of
thos cities, and live: 19:6 lest the aveng of the blood pursu the
slayer, while hi heart is hot, and overtak him, becaus the way is
long, and slay him; wherea he wa not worthi of death, inasmuch as he
hat him not in time past.

19:7 wherefor I command thee, saying, thou shalt separ three
citi for thee.

19:8 and if the lord thi god enlarg thi coast, as he hath sworn unto
thi fathers, and give thee all the land which he promis to give unto
thi fathers; 19:9 If thou shalt keep all these command to do
them, which I command thee thi day, to love the lord thi god, and to
walk ever in hi ways; then shalt thou add three citi more for thee,
besid these three: 19:10 that innoc blood be not shed in thi land,
which the lord thi god giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be
upon thee.

19:11 but if ani man hate hi neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and
ris up against him, and smite him mortal that he die, and fleeth
into one of these cities: 19:12 then the elder of hi citi shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliv him into the hand of the aveng of
blood, that he may die.

19:13 thine eye shall not piti him, but thou shalt put away the guilt
of innoc blood from israel, that it may go well with thee.

19:14 thou shalt not remov thi neighbour' landmark, which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in
th land that the lord thi god giveth thee to possess it.

19:15 one wit shall not rise up against a man for ani iniquity, or
for ani sin, in ani sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established.

19:16 If a fals wit rise up against ani man to testifi against
him that which is wrong; 19:17 then both the men, between whom the
controversi is, shall stand befor the lord, befor the priest and
th judges, which shall be in those days; 19:18 and the judg shall
mak dilig inquisition: and, behold, if the wit be a false
witness, and hath testifi fals against hi brother; 19:19 then
shal ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto hi brother:
so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.

19:20 and those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more ani such evil among you.

19:21 and thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

20:1 when thou goest out to battl against thine enemies, and seest
horses, and chariots, and a peopl more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the lord thi god is with thee, which brought thee up out of
th land of egypt.

20:2 and it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
priest shall approach and speak unto the people, 20:3 and shall say
unto them, hear, O israel, ye approach thi day unto battl against
your enemies: let not your heart faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neith be ye terrifi becaus of them; 20:4 for the lord your god is
h that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save
you.

20:5 and the offic shall speak unto the people, saying, what man is
ther that hath built a new house, and hath not dedic it? let him
go and return to hi house, lest he die in the battle, and anoth man
ded it.

20:6 and what man is he that hath plant a vineyard, and hath not yet
eaten of it? let him also go and return unto hi house, lest he die in
th battle, and anoth man eat of it.

20:7 and what man is there that hath betroth a wife, and hath not
taken her? let him go and return unto hi house, lest he die in the
battle, and anoth man take her.

20:8 and the offic shall speak further unto the people, and they
shal say, what man is there that is fear and fainthearted? let him
go and return unto hi house, lest hi brethren' heart faint as well
a hi heart.

20:9 and it shall be, when the offic have made an end of speaking
unto the peopl that they shall make captain of the armi to lead
th people.

20:10 when thou comest nigh unto a citi to fight against it, then
proclaim peac unto it.

20:11 and it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the peopl that is found therein
shal be tributari unto thee, and they shall serv thee.

20:12 and if it will make no peac with thee, but will make war
against thee, then thou shalt besieg it: 20:13 and when the lord thy
god hath deliv it into thine hands, thou shalt smite everi male
thereof with the edg of the sword: 20:14 but the women, and the
littl ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which the lord thi god hath given thee.

20:15 thu shalt thou do unto all the citi which are veri far off
from thee, which are not of the citi of these nations.

20:16 but of the citi of these people, which the lord thi god doth
giv thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save aliv noth that
breatheth: 20:17 but thou shalt utterli destroy them; namely, the
hittites, and the amorites, the canaanites, and the perizzites, the
hivites, and the jebusites; as the lord thi god hath command thee:
20:18 that they teach you not to do after all their abominations,
which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the
lord your god.

20:19 when thou shalt besieg a citi a long time, in make war
against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the tree thereof by
forc an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou
shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man' life) to
employ them in the siege: 20:20 onli the tree which thou knowest that
they be not tree for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and
thou shalt build bulwark against the citi that maketh war with thee,
until it be subdued.

21:1 If one be found slain in the land which the lord thi god giveth
the to possess it, lie in the field, and it be not known who hath
slain him: 21:2 then thi elder and thi judg shall come forth, and
they shall measur unto the citi which are round about him that is
slain: 21:3 and it shall be, that the citi which is next unto the
slain man, even the elder of that citi shall take an heifer, which
hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; 21:4
and the elder of that citi shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
valley, which is neither ear nor sown, and shall strike off the
heifer' neck there in the valley: 21:5 and the priest the son of
levi shall come near; for them the lord thi god hath chosen to
minist unto him, and to bless in the name of the lord; and by their
word shall everi controversi and everi stroke be tried: 21:6 and all
th elder of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash
their hand over the heifer that is behead in the valley: 21:7 and
they shall answer and say, our hand have not shed thi blood, neither
hav our eye seen it.

21:8 Be merciful, O lord, unto thi peopl israel, whom thou hast
redeemed, and lay not innoc blood unto thi peopl of israel's
charge. and the blood shall be forgiven them.

21:9 So shalt thou put away the guilt of innoc blood from among
you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the lord.

21:10 when thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the lord
thi god hath deliv them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
captive, 21:11 and seest among the captiv a beauti woman, and
hast a desir unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thi wife; 21:12
then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her
head, and pare her nails; 21:13 and she shall put the raiment of her
capt from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail
h father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go
in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thi wife.

21:14 and it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt
let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for
money, thou shalt not make merchandis of her, becaus thou hast
humbl her.

21:15 If a man have two wives, one beloved, and anoth hated, and
they have born him children, both the belov and the hated; and if
th firstborn son be her that wa hated: 21:16 then it shall be, when
h maketh hi son to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make
th son of the belov firstborn befor the son of the hated, which is
inde the firstborn: 21:17 but he shall acknowledg the son of the
hat for the firstborn, by give him a doubl portion of all that he
hath: for he is the begin of hi strength; the right of the
firstborn is his.

21:18 If a man have a stubborn and rebelli son, which will not obey
th voic of hi father, or the voic of hi mother, and that, when
they have chasten him, will not hearken unto them: 21:19 then shall
hi father and hi mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the
eld of hi city, and unto the gate of hi place; 21:20 and they
shal say unto the elder of hi city, thi our son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a
drunkard.

21:21 and all the men of hi citi shall stone him with stones, that he
die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all israel shall
hear, and fear.

21:22 and if a man have commit a sin worthi of death, and he be to
b put to death, and thou hang him on a tree: 21:23 hi bodi shall not
remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in ani wise buri him
that day; (for he that is hang is accurs of god;) that thi land be
not defiled, which the lord thi god giveth thee for an inheritance.

22:1 thou shalt not see thi brother' ox or hi sheep go astray, and
hid thyself from them: thou shalt in ani case bring them again unto
thi brother.

22:2 and if thi brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him
not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be
with thee until thi brother seek after it, and thou shalt restor it
to him again.

22:3 In like manner shalt thou do with hi ass; and so shalt thou do
with hi raiment; and with all lost thing of thi brother's, which he
hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest
not hide thyself.

22:4 thou shalt not see thi brother' ass or hi ox fall down by the
way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt sure help him to lift
them up again.

22:5 the woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man,
neith shall a man put on a woman' garment: for all that do so are
abomin unto the lord thi god.

22:6 If a bird' nest chanc to be befor thee in the way in ani tree,
or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam
sit upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam
with the young: 22:7 but thou shalt in ani wise let the dam go, and
tak the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou
mayest prolong thi days.

22:8 when thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement
for thi roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if ani man
fal from thence.

22:9 thou shalt not sow thi vineyard with diver seeds: lest the fruit
of thi seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thi vineyard, be
defiled.

22:10 thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.

22:11 thou shalt not wear a garment of diver sorts, as of woollen and
linen together.

22:12 thou shalt make thee fring upon the four quarter of thy
vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.

22:13 If ani man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, 22:14
and give occas of speech against her, and bring up an evil name
upon her, and say, I took thi woman, and when I came to her, I found
her not a maid: 22:15 then shall the father of the damsel, and her
mother, take and bring forth the token of the damsel' virgin unto
th elder of the citi in the gate: 22:16 and the damsel' father
shal say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto thi man to wife,
and he hateth her; 22:17 and, lo, he hath given occas of speech
against her, saying, I found not thi daughter a maid; and yet these
ar the token of my daughter' virginity. and they shall spread the
cloth befor the elder of the city.

22:18 and the elder of that citi shall take that man and chastise
him; 22:19 and they shall amerc him in an hundr shekel of silver,
and give them unto the father of the damsel, becaus he hath brought
up an evil name upon a virgin of israel: and she shall be hi wife; he
may not put her away all hi days.

22:20 but if thi thing be true, and the token of virgin be not
found for the damsel: 22:21 then they shall bring out the damsel to
th door of her father' house, and the men of her citi shall stone
h with stone that she die: becaus she hath wrought folli in
israel, to play the whore in her father' house: so shalt thou put
evil away from among you.

22:22 If a man be found lie with a woman marri to an husband, then
they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and
th woman: so shalt thou put away evil from israel.

22:23 If a damsel that is a virgin be betroth unto an husband, and a
man find her in the city, and lie with her; 22:24 then ye shall bring
them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with
ston that they die; the damsel, becaus she cri not, be in the
city; and the man, becaus he hath humbl hi neighbour' wife: so
thou shalt put away evil from among you.

22:25 but if a man find a betroth damsel in the field, and the man
forc her, and lie with her: then the man onli that lay with her shall
die.

22:26 but unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the
damsel no sin worthi of death: for as when a man riseth against his
neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is thi matter: 22:27 for he found
her in the field, and the betroth damsel cried, and there wa none
to save her.

22:28 If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed,
and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; 22:29 then
th man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel' father fifty
shekel of silver, and she shall be hi wife; becaus he hath humbled
her, he may not put her away all hi days.

22:30 A man shall not take hi father' wife, nor discov his
father' skirt.

23:1 He that is wound in the stones, or hath hi privi member cut
off, shall not enter into the congreg of the lord.

23:2 A bastard shall not enter into the congreg of the lord; even
to hi tenth gener shall he not enter into the congreg of
th lord.

23:3 An ammonit or moabit shall not enter into the congreg of
th lord; even to their tenth gener shall they not enter into the
congreg of the lord for ever: 23:4 becaus they met you not with
bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of egypt; and
becaus they hire against thee balaam the son of beor of pethor of
mesopotamia, to curs thee.

23:5 nevertheless the lord thi god would not hearken unto balaam; but
th lord thi god turn the curs into a bless unto thee, because
th lord thi god love thee.

23:6 thou shalt not seek their peac nor their prosper all thi days
for ever.

23:7 thou shalt not abhor an edomite; for he is thi brother: thou
shalt not abhor an egyptian; becaus thou wast a stranger in hi land.

23:8 the children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
congreg of the lord in their third generation.

23:9 when the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from everi wick thing.

23:10 If there be among you ani man, that is not clean by reason of
unclean that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of
th camp, he shall not come within the camp: 23:11 but it shall be,
when even cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the
sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.

23:12 thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou
shalt go forth abroad: 23:13 and thou shalt have a paddl upon thy
weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt eas thyself abroad, thou
shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh
from thee: 23:14 for the lord thi god walketh in the midst of thy
camp, to deliv thee, and to give up thine enemi befor thee;
therefor shall thi camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.

23:15 thou shalt not deliv unto hi master the servant which is
escap from hi master unto thee: 23:16 He shall dwell with thee,
even among you, in that place which he shall choos in one of thy
gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

23:17 there shall be no whore of the daughter of israel, nor a
sodomit of the son of israel.

23:18 thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the hous of the lord thi god for ani vow: for even both these
ar abomin unto the lord thi god.

23:19 thou shalt not lend upon usuri to thi brother; usuri of money,
usuri of victuals, usuri of ani thing that is lent upon usury: 23:20
unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thi brother thou
shalt not lend upon usury: that the lord thi god may bless thee in all
that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

23:21 when thou shalt vow a vow unto the lord thi god, thou shalt not
slack to pay it: for the lord thi god will sure requir it of thee;
and it would be sin in thee.

23:22 but if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.

23:23 that which is gone out of thi lip thou shalt keep and perform;
even a freewil offering, accord as thou hast vow unto the lord
thi god, which thou hast promis with thi mouth.

23:24 when thou comest into thi neighbour' vineyard, then thou mayest
eat grape thi fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any
in thi vessel.

23:25 when thou comest into the stand corn of thi neighbour, then
thou mayest pluck the ear with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a
sickl unto thi neighbour' stand corn.

24:1 when a man hath taken a wife, and marri her, and it come to
pass that she find no favour in hi eyes, becaus he hath found some
unclean in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and
giv it in her hand, and send her out of hi house.

24:2 and when she is depart out of hi house, she may go and be
anoth man' wife.

24:3 and if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be hi wife;
24:4 her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again
to be hi wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination
befor the lord: and thou shalt not caus the land to sin, which the
lord thi god giveth thee for an inheritance.

24:5 when a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war,
neith shall he be charg with ani business: but he shall be free at
hom one year, and shall cheer up hi wife which he hath taken.

24:6 No man shall take the nether or the upper millston to pledge:
for he taketh a man' life to pledge.

24:7 If a man be found steal ani of hi brethren of the children of
israel, and maketh merchandis of him, or selleth him; then that thief
shal die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.

24:8 take heed in the plagu of leprosy, that thou observ diligently,
and do accord to all that the priest the levit shall teach you:
a I command them, so ye shall observ to do.

24:9 rememb what the lord thi god did unto miriam by the way, after
that ye were come forth out of egypt.

24:10 when thou dost lend thi brother ani thing, thou shalt not go
into hi hous to fetch hi pledge.

24:11 thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend
shal bring out the pledg abroad unto thee.

24:12 and if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with hi pledge:
24:13 In ani case thou shalt deliv him the pledg again when the sun
goeth down, that he may sleep in hi own raiment, and bless thee: and
it shall be righteous unto thee befor the lord thi god.

24:14 thou shalt not oppress an hire servant that is poor and needy,
wheth he be of thi brethren, or of thi stranger that are in thy
land within thi gates: 24:15 At hi day thou shalt give him hi hire,
neith shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his
heart upon it: lest he cri against thee unto the lord, and it be sin
unto thee.

24:16 the father shall not be put to death for the children, neither
shal the children be put to death for the fathers: everi man shall be
put to death for hi own sin.

24:17 thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless; nor take a widow' raiment to pledge: 24:18 but thou shalt
rememb that thou wast a bondman in egypt, and the lord thi god
redeem thee thence: therefor I command thee to do thi thing.

24:19 when thou cuttest down thine harvest in thi field, and hast
forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it
shal be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that
th lord thi god may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.

24:20 when thou beatest thine oliv tree, thou shalt not go over the
bough again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and
for the widow.

24:21 when thou gatherest the grape of thi vineyard, thou shalt not
glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless,
and for the widow.

24:22 and thou shalt rememb that thou wast a bondman in the land of
egypt: therefor I command thee to do thi thing.

25:1 If there be a controversi between men, and they come unto
judgment, that the judg may judg them; then they shall justifi the
righteous, and condemn the wicked.

25:2 and it shall be, if the wick man be worthi to be beaten, that
th judg shall caus him to lie down, and to be beaten befor his
face, accord to hi fault, by a certain number.

25:3 forti stripe he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should
exceed, and beat him abov these with mani stripes, then thi brother
should seem vile unto thee.

25:4 thou shalt not muzzl the ox when he treadeth out the corn.

25:5 If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no
child, the wife of the dead shall not marri without unto a stranger:
h husband' brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to
wife, and perform the duti of an husband' brother unto her.

25:6 and it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall
succe in the name of hi brother which is dead, that hi name be not
put out of israel.

25:7 and if the man like not to take hi brother' wife, then let his
brother' wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, my
husband' brother refuseth to rais up unto hi brother a name in
israel, he will not perform the duti of my husband' brother.

25:8 then the elder of hi citi shall call him, and speak unto him:
and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her; 25:9 then
shal hi brother' wife come unto him in the presenc of the elders,
and loos hi shoe from off hi foot, and spit in hi face, and shall
answ and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build
up hi brother' house.

25:10 and hi name shall be call in israel, the hous of him that
hath hi shoe loosed.

25:11 when men strive togeth one with another, and the wife of the
on draweth near for to deliv her husband out of the hand of him
that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the
secrets: 25:12 then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not
piti her.

25:13 thou shalt not have in thi bag diver weights, a great and a
small.

25:14 thou shalt not have in thine hous diver measures, a great and
a small.

25:15 but thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and
just measur shalt thou have: that thi day may be lengthen in the
land which the lord thi god giveth thee.

25:16 for all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
an abomin unto the lord thi god.

25:17 rememb what amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
forth out of egypt; 25:18 how he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feebl behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he fear not god.

25:19 therefor it shall be, when the lord thi god hath given thee
rest from all thine enemi round about, in the land which the lord
thi god giveth thee for an inherit to possess it, that thou shalt
blot out the remembr of amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not
forget it.

26:1 and it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the
lord thi god giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and
dwellest therein; 26:2 that thou shalt take of the first of all the
fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thi land that the lord
thi god giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto
th place which the lord thi god shall choos to place hi name there.

26:3 and thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days,
and say unto him, I profess thi day unto the lord thi god, that I am
com unto the countri which the lord sware unto our father for to
giv us.

26:4 and the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set
it down befor the altar of the lord thi god.

26:5 and thou shalt speak and say befor the lord thi god, A syrian
readi to perish wa my father, and he went down into egypt, and
sojourn there with a few, and becam there a nation, great, mighty,
and populous: 26:6 and the egyptian evil entreat us, and afflicted
us, and laid upon us hard bondage: 26:7 and when we cri unto the
lord god of our fathers, the lord heard our voice, and look on our
affliction, and our labour, and our oppression: 26:8 and the lord
brought us forth out of egypt with a mighti hand, and with an
outstretch arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and
with wonders: 26:9 and he hath brought us into thi place, and hath
given us thi land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:10 and now, behold, I have brought the firstfruit of the land,
which thou, O lord, hast given me. and thou shalt set it befor the
lord thi god, and worship befor the lord thi god: 26:11 and thou
shalt rejoic in everi good thing which the lord thi god hath given
unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the levite, and the
strang that is among you.

26:12 when thou hast made an end of tith all the tith of thine
increas the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given
it unto the levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
they may eat within thi gates, and be filled; 26:13 then thou shalt
say befor the lord thi god, I have brought away the hallow things
out of mine house, and also have given them unto the levite, and unto
th stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, accord to all
thi command which thou hast command me: I have not transgressed
thi commandments, neither have I forgotten them.

26:14 I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken
away ought thereof for ani unclean use, nor given ought thereof for
th dead: but I have hearken to the voic of the lord my god, and
hav done accord to all that thou hast command me.

26:15 look down from thi holi habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
peopl israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest
unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:16 thi day the lord thi god hath command thee to do these
statut and judgments: thou shalt therefor keep and do them with all
thin heart, and with all thi soul.

26:17 thou hast avouch the lord thi day to be thi god, and to walk
in hi ways, and to keep hi statutes, and hi commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto hi voice: 26:18 and the lord hath
avouch thee thi day to be hi peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all hi commandments; 26:19 and to
mak thee high abov all nation which he hath made, in praise, and in
name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holi peopl unto the
lord thi god, as he hath spoken.

27:1 and mose with the elder of israel command the people, saying,
keep all the command which I command you thi day.

27:2 and it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over jordan unto
th land which the lord thi god giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 27:3 and thou shalt
writ upon them all the word of thi law, when thou art pass over,
that thou mayest go in unto the land which the lord thi god giveth
thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the lord god of thy
fath hath promis thee.

27:4 therefor it shall be when ye be gone over jordan, that ye shall
set up these stones, which I command you thi day, in mount ebal, and
thou shalt plaister them with plaister.

27:5 and there shalt thou build an altar unto the lord thi god, an
altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up ani iron tool upon them.

27:6 thou shalt build the altar of the lord thi god of whole stones:
and thou shalt offer burnt offer thereon unto the lord thi god:
27:7 and thou shalt offer peac offerings, and shalt eat there, and
rejoic befor the lord thi god.

27:8 and thou shalt write upon the stone all the word of thi law
veri plainly.

27:9 and mose and the priest the levit spake unto all israel,
saying, take heed, and hearken, O israel; thi day thou art becom the
peopl of the lord thi god.

27:10 thou shalt therefor obey the voic of the lord thi god, and do
hi command and hi statutes, which I command thee thi day.

27:11 and mose charg the peopl the same day, saying, 27:12 these
shal stand upon mount gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come
ov jordan; simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and joseph,
and benjamin: 27:13 and these shall stand upon mount ebal to curse;
reuben, gad, and asher, and zebulun, dan, and naphtali.

27:14 and the levit shall speak, and say unto all the men of israel
with a loud voice, 27:15 curs be the man that maketh ani graven or
molten image, an abomin unto the lord, the work of the hand of
th craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. and all the people
shal answer and say, amen.

27:16 curs be he that setteth light by hi father or hi mother. and
al the peopl shall say, amen.

27:17 curs be he that removeth hi neighbour' landmark. and all the
peopl shall say, amen.

27:18 curs be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. and
al the peopl shall say, amen.

27:19 curs be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow. and all the peopl shall say, amen.

27:20 curs be he that lieth with hi father' wife; becaus he
uncovereth hi father' skirt. and all the peopl shall say, amen.

27:21 curs be he that lieth with ani manner of beast. and all the
peopl shall say, amen.

27:22 curs be he that lieth with hi sister, the daughter of his
father, or the daughter of hi mother. and all the peopl shall say,
amen.

27:23 curs be he that lieth with hi mother in law. and all the
peopl shall say, amen.

27:24 curs be he that smiteth hi neighbour secretly. and all the
peopl shall say, amen.

27:25 curs be he that taketh reward to slay an innoc person. and
al the peopl shall say, amen.

27:26 curs be he that confirmeth not all the word of thi law to do
them. and all the peopl shall say, amen.

28:1 and it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken dilig unto
th voic of the lord thi god, to observ and to do all his
command which I command thee thi day, that the lord thi god will
set thee on high abov all nation of the earth: 28:2 and all these
bless shall come on thee, and overtak thee, if thou shalt hearken
unto the voic of the lord thi god.

28:3 bless shalt thou be in the city, and bless shalt thou be in
th field.

28:4 bless shall be the fruit of thi body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thi cattle, the increas of thi kine, and the
flock of thi sheep.

28:5 bless shall be thi basket and thi store.

28:6 bless shalt thou be when thou comest in, and bless shalt thou
b when thou goest out.

28:7 the lord shall caus thine enemi that rise up against thee to
b smitten befor thi face: they shall come out against thee one way,
and flee befor thee seven ways.

28:8 the lord shall command the bless upon thee in thi storehouses,
and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee
in the land which the lord thi god giveth thee.

28:9 the lord shall establish thee an holi peopl unto himself, as he
hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the command of the lord
thi god, and walk in hi ways.

28:10 and all peopl of the earth shall see that thou art call by
th name of the lord; and they shall be afraid of thee.

28:11 and the lord shall make thee plenteou in goods, in the fruit of
thi body, and in the fruit of thi cattle, and in the fruit of thy
ground, in the land which the lord sware unto thi father to give
thee.

28:12 the lord shall open unto thee hi good treasure, the heaven to
giv the rain unto thi land in hi season, and to bless all the work
of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto mani nations, and thou shalt
not borrow.

28:13 and the lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and
thou shalt be abov only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou
hearken unto the command of the lord thi god, which I command
the thi day, to observ and to do them: 28:14 and thou shalt not go
asid from ani of the word which I command thee thi day, to the
right hand, or to the left, to go after other god to serv them.

28:15 but it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voic of the lord thi god, to observ to do all hi command and
hi statut which I command thee thi day; that all these curses
shal come upon thee, and overtak thee: 28:16 curs shalt thou be in
th city, and curs shalt thou be in the field.

28:17 curs shall be thi basket and thi store.

28:18 curs shall be the fruit of thi body, and the fruit of thy
land, the increas of thi kine, and the flock of thi sheep.

28:19 curs shalt thou be when thou comest in, and curs shalt thou
b when thou goest out.

28:20 the lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in
al that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be
destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; becaus of the wicked of
thi doings, wherebi thou hast forsaken me.

28:21 the lord shall make the pestil cleav unto thee, until he
hav consum thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess
it.

28:22 the lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever,
and with an inflammation, and with an extrem burning, and with the
sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursu thee
until thou perish.

28:23 and thi heaven that is over thi head shall be brass, and the
earth that is under thee shall be iron.

28:24 the lord shall make the rain of thi land powder and dust: from
heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

28:25 the lord shall caus thee to be smitten befor thine enemies:
th shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven way before
them: and shalt be remov into all the kingdom of the earth.

28:26 and thi carcas shall be meat unto all fowl of the air, and
unto the beast of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.

28:27 the lord will smite thee with the botch of egypt, and with the
emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not
b healed.

28:28 the lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
astonish of heart: 28:29 and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the
blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thi ways: and
thou shalt be onli oppress and spoil evermore, and no man shall
sav thee.

28:30 thou shalt betroth a wife, and anoth man shall lie with her:
thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou
shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grape thereof.

28:31 thine ox shall be slain befor thine eyes, and thou shalt not
eat thereof: thine ass shall be violent taken away from befor thy
face, and shall not be restor to thee: thi sheep shall be given unto
thin enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescu them.

28:32 thi son and thi daughter shall be given unto anoth people,
and thine eye shall look, and fail with long for them all the day
long; and there shall be no might in thine hand.

28:33 the fruit of thi land, and all thi labours, shall a nation which
thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be onli oppress and crushed
alway: 28:34 So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shalt see.

28:35 the lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a
sor botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thi foot unto the
top of thi head.

28:36 the lord shall bring thee, and thi king which thou shalt set
ov thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thi father have
known; and there shalt thou serv other gods, wood and stone.

28:37 and thou shalt becom an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword,
among all nation whither the lord shall lead thee.

28:38 thou shalt carri much seed out into the field, and shalt gather
but littl in; for the locust shall consum it.

28:39 thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither
drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worm shall eat
them.

28:40 thou shalt have oliv tree throughout all thi coasts, but thou
shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine oliv shall cast his
fruit.

28:41 thou shalt beget son and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy
them; for they shall go into captivity.

28:42 all thi tree and fruit of thi land shall the locust consume.

28:43 the stranger that is within thee shall get up abov thee very
high; and thou shalt come down veri low.

28:44 He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall
b the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

28:45 moreov all these curs shall come upon thee, and shall pursue
thee, and overtak thee, till thou be destroyed; becaus thou
hearkenedst not unto the voic of the lord thi god, to keep his
command and hi statut which he command thee: 28:46 and they
shal be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thi seed for
ever.

28:47 becaus thou servedst not the lord thi god with joyfulness, and
with glad of heart, for the abund of all things; 28:48
therefor shalt thou serv thine enemi which the lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want
of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thi neck, until he
hav destroy thee.

28:49 the lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the
end of the earth, as swift as the eagl flieth; a nation whose tongue
th shalt not understand; 28:50 A nation of fierc countenance, which
shal not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young:
28:51 and he shall eat the fruit of thi cattle, and the fruit of thy
land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leav thee either
corn, wine, or oil, or the increas of thi kine, or flock of thy
sheep, until he have destroy thee.

28:52 and he shall besieg thee in all thi gates, until thi high and
fenc wall come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy
land: and he shall besieg thee in all thi gate throughout all thy
land, which the lord thi god hath given thee.

28:53 and thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
son and of thi daughters, which the lord thi god hath given thee, in
th siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemi shall
distress thee: 28:54 So that the man that is tender among you, and
veri delicate, hi eye shall be evil toward hi brother, and toward
th wife of hi bosom, and toward the remnant of hi children which he
shal leave: 28:55 So that he will not give to ani of them of the
flesh of hi children whom he shall eat: becaus he hath noth left
him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemi shall
distress thee in all thi gates.

28:56 the tender and delic woman among you, which would not
adventur to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness
and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom,
and toward her son, and toward her daughter, 28:57 and toward her
young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her
children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all
th secretli in the sieg and straitness, wherewith thine enemy
shal distress thee in thi gates.

28:58 If thou wilt not observ to do all the word of thi law that
ar written in thi book, that thou mayest fear thi gloriou and
fear name, the lord thi god; 28:59 then the lord will make thy
plagu wonderful, and the plagu of thi seed, even great plagues,
and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

28:60 moreov he will bring upon thee all the diseas of egypt,
which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleav unto thee.

28:61 also everi sickness, and everi plague, which is not written in
th book of thi law, them will the lord bring upon thee, until thou
b destroyed.

28:62 and ye shall be left few in number, wherea ye were as the stars
of heaven for multitude; becaus thou wouldest not obey the voic of
th lord thi god.

28:63 and it shall come to pass, that as the lord rejoic over you to
do you good, and to multipli you; so the lord will rejoic over you to
destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be pluck from
off the land whither thou goest to possess it.

28:64 and the lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one
end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serv other
gods, which neither thou nor thi father have known, even wood and
stone.

28:65 and among these nation shalt thou find no ease, neither shall
th sole of thi foot have rest: but the lord shall give thee there a
trembl heart, and fail of eyes, and sorrow of mind: 28:66 and
thi life shall hang in doubt befor thee; and thou shalt fear day and
night, and shalt have none assur of thi life: 28:67 In the morning
th shalt say, would god it were even! and at even thou shalt say,
would god it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou
shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eye which thou shalt see.

28:68 and the lord shall bring thee into egypt again with ships, by
th way whereof I spake unto thee, thou shalt see it no more again:
and there ye shall be sold unto your enemi for bondmen and
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

29:1 these are the word of the covenant, which the lord commanded
mos to make with the children of israel in the land of moab, beside
th coven which he made with them in horeb.

29:2 and mose call unto all israel, and said unto them, Ye have
seen all that the lord did befor your eye in the land of egypt unto
pharaoh, and unto all hi servants, and unto all hi land; 29:3 the
great temptat which thine eye have seen, the signs, and those
great miracles: 29:4 yet the lord hath not given you an heart to
perceive, and eye to see, and ear to hear, unto thi day.

29:5 and I have led you forti year in the wilderness: your clothes
ar not waxen old upon you, and thi shoe is not waxen old upon thy
foot.

29:6 Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong
drink: that ye might know that I am the lord your god.

29:7 and when ye came unto thi place, sihon the king of heshbon, and
og the king of bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote
them: 29:8 and we took their land, and gave it for an inherit unto
th reubenites, and to the gadites, and to the half tribe of manasseh.

29:9 keep therefor the word of thi covenant, and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do.

29:10 Ye stand thi day all of you befor the lord your god; your
captain of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the
men of israel, 29:11 your littl ones, your wives, and thi stranger
that is in thi camp, from the hewer of thi wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 that thou shouldest enter into coven with the lord thy
god, and into hi oath, which the lord thi god maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 that he may establish thee to day for a peopl unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a god, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thi fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and
to jacob.

29:14 neither with you onli do I make thi coven and thi oath;
29:15 but with him that standeth here with us thi day befor the lord
our god, and also with him that is not here with us thi day: 29:16
(for ye know how we have dwelt in the land of egypt; and how we came
through the nation which ye pass by; 29:17 and ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which
wer among them:) 29:18 lest there should be among you man, or woman,
or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away thi day from the lord
our god, to go and serv the god of these nations; lest there should
b among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood; 29:19 and it come
to pass, when he heareth the word of thi curse, that he bless
himself in hi heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagin of mine heart, to add drunken to thirst: 29:20 the
lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the lord and his
jealousi shall smoke against that man, and all the curs that are
written in thi book shall lie upon him, and the lord shall blot out
hi name from under heaven.

29:21 and the lord shall separ him unto evil out of all the tribes
of israel, accord to all the curs of the coven that are
written in thi book of the law: 29:22 So that the gener to come
of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that
shal come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagu of
that land, and the sick which the lord hath laid upon it; 29:23
and that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning,
that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor ani grass groweth therein, like
th overthrow of sodom, and gomorrah, admah, and zeboim, which the
lord overthrew in hi anger, and in hi wrath: 29:24 even all nations
shal say, wherefor hath the lord done thu unto thi land? what
meaneth the heat of thi great anger?  29:25 then men shall say,
becaus they have forsaken the coven of the lord god of their
fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the
land of egypt: 29:26 for they went and serv other gods, and
worship them, god whom they knew not, and whom he had not given
unto them: 29:27 and the anger of the lord wa kindl against this
land, to bring upon it all the curs that are written in thi book:
29:28 and the lord root them out of their land in anger, and in
wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into anoth land, as
it is thi day.

29:29 the secret thing belong unto the lord our god: but those things
which are reveal belong unto us and to our children for ever, that
w may do all the word of thi law.

30:1 and it shall come to pass, when all these thing are come upon
thee, the bless and the curse, which I have set befor thee, and
thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the lord
thi god hath driven thee, 30:2 and shalt return unto the lord thi god,
and shalt obey hi voic accord to all that I command thee this
day, thou and thi children, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul; 30:3 that then the lord thi god will turn thi captivity, and
hav compass upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all
th nations, whither the lord thi god hath scatter thee.

30:4 If ani of thine be driven out unto the outmost part of heaven,
from thenc will the lord thi god gather thee, and from thenc will he
fetch thee: 30:5 and the lord thi god will bring thee into the land
which thi father possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do
the good, and multipli thee abov thi fathers.

30:6 and the lord thi god will circumcis thine heart, and the heart
of thi seed, to love the lord thi god with all thine heart, and with
al thi soul, that thou mayest live.

30:7 and the lord thi god will put all these curs upon thine
enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecut thee.

30:8 and thou shalt return and obey the voic of the lord, and do all
hi command which I command thee thi day.

30:9 and the lord thi god will make thee plenteou in everi work of
thin hand, in the fruit of thi body, and in the fruit of thi cattle,
and in the fruit of thi land, for good: for the lord will again
rejoic over thee for good, as he rejoic over thi fathers: 30:10 if
thou shalt hearken unto the voic of the lord thi god, to keep his
command and hi statut which are written in thi book of the
law, and if thou turn unto the lord thi god with all thine heart, and
with all thi soul.

30:11 for thi command which I command thee thi day, it is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off.

30:12 It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, who shall go up
for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do
it?  30:13 neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, who
shal go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it?  30:14 but the word is veri nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth, and in thi heart, that thou mayest do it.

30:15 see, I have set befor thee thi day life and good, and death
and evil; 30:16 In that I command thee thi day to love the lord thy
god, to walk in hi ways, and to keep hi command and his
statut and hi judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and
th lord thi god shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

30:17 but if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but
shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serv them; 30:18 i
denounc unto you thi day, that ye shall sure perish, and that ye
shal not prolong your day upon the land, whither thou passest over
jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 I call heaven and earth to record thi day against you, that i
hav set befor you life and death, bless and cursing: therefore
choos life, that both thou and thi seed may live: 30:20 that thou
mayest love the lord thi god, and that thou mayest obey hi voice, and
that thou mayest cleav unto him: for he is thi life, and the length
of thi days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thi fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and mose went and spake these word unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, I am an hundr and twenti year old this
day; I can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over thi jordan.

31:3 the lord thi god, he will go over befor thee, and he will
destroy these nation from befor thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over befor thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and the lord shall do unto them as he did to sihon and to og,
k of the amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

31:5 and the lord shall give them up befor your face, that ye may do
unto them accord unto all the command which I have commanded
you.

31:6 Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the lord thi god, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsak thee.

31:7 and mose call unto joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
al israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
thi peopl unto the land which the lord hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt caus them to inherit it.

31:8 and the lord, he it is that doth go befor thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsak thee: fear not, neither
b dismayed.

31:9 and mose wrote thi law, and deliv it unto the priest the
son of levi, which bare the ark of the coven of the lord, and unto
al the elder of israel.

31:10 and mose command them, saying, At the end of everi seven
years, in the solemn of the year of release, in the feast of
tabernacles, 31:11 when all israel is come to appear befor the lord
thi god in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read thi law
befor all israel in their hearing.

31:12 gather the peopl together, men and women, and children, and thy
strang that is within thi gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the lord your god, and observ to do all the words
of thi law: 31:13 and that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the lord your god, as long as ye
liv in the land whither ye go over jordan to possess it.

31:14 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thi day approach that
thou must die: call joshua, and present yourselv in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. and mose and
joshua went, and present themselv in the tabernacl of the
congregation.

31:15 and the lord appear in the tabernacl in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

31:16 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and thi peopl will rise up, and go a whore after the gods
of the stranger of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
wil forsak me, and break my coven which I have made with them.

31:17 then my anger shall be kindl against them in that day, and i
wil forsak them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall
b devoured, and mani evil and troubl shall befal them; so that
they will say in that day, are not these evil come upon us, because
our god is not among us?  31:18 and I will sure hide my face in that
day for all the evil which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turn unto other gods.

31:19 now therefor write ye thi song for you, and teach it the
children of israel: put it in their mouths, that thi song may be a
wit for me against the children of israel.

31:20 for when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware
unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall
hav eaten and fill themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn
unto other gods, and serv them, and provok me, and break my
covenant.

31:21 and it shall come to pass, when mani evil and troubl are
befallen them, that thi song shall testifi against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouth of their seed: for i
know their imagin which they go about, even now, befor I have
brought them into the land which I sware.

31:22 mose therefor wrote thi song the same day, and taught it the
children of israel.

31:23 and he gave joshua the son of nun a charge, and said, Be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of israel
into the land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee.

31:24 and it came to pass, when mose had made an end of write the
word of thi law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 that
mos command the levites, which bare the ark of the coven of the
lord, saying, 31:26 take thi book of the law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the coven of the lord your god, that it may be there
for a wit against thee.

31:27 for I know thi rebellion, and thi stiff neck: behold, while I am
yet aliv with you thi day, ye have been rebelli against the lord;
and how much more after my death?  31:28 gather unto me all the elders
of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these word in
their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.

31:29 for I know that after my death ye will utterli corrupt
yourselves, and turn asid from the way which I have command you;
and evil will befal you in the latter days; becaus ye will do evil
in the sight of the lord, to provok him to anger through the work of
your hands.

31:30 and mose spake in the ear of all the congreg of israel
th word of thi song, until they were ended.

32:1 give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the
word of my mouth.

32:2 My doctrin shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the shower upon
th grass: 32:3 becaus I will publish the name of the lord: ascribe
y great unto our god.

32:4 He is the rock, hi work is perfect: for all hi way are
judgment: a god of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.

32:5 they have corrupt themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
children: they are a pervers and crook generation.

32:6 Do ye thu requit the lord, O foolish peopl and unwise? is not
h thi father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
establish thee?  32:7 rememb the day of old, consid the years
of mani generations: ask thi father, and he will shew thee; thy
elders, and they will tell thee.

32:8 when the most high divid to the nation their inheritance, when
h separ the son of adam, he set the bound of the people
accord to the number of the children of israel.

32:9 for the lord' portion is hi people; jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.

32:10 He found him in a desert land, and in the wast howling
wilderness; he led him about, he instruct him, he kept him as the
appl of hi eye.

32:11 As an eagl stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
32:12 So the lord alon did lead him, and there wa no strang god
with him.

32:13 He made him ride on the high place of the earth, that he might
eat the increas of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of
th rock, and oil out of the flinti rock; 32:14 butter of kine, and
milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and ram of the breed of bashan, and
goats, with the fat of kidney of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure
blood of the grape.

32:15 but jeshurun wax fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art
grown thick, thou art cover with fatness; then he forsook god which
mad him, and lightli esteem the rock of hi salvation.

32:16 they provok him to jealousi with strang gods, with
abomin provok they him to anger.

32:17 they sacrif unto devils, not to god; to god whom they knew
not, to new god that came newli up, whom your father fear not.

32:18 Of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast
forgotten god that form thee.

32:19 and when the lord saw it, he abhor them, becaus of the
provok of hi sons, and of hi daughters.

32:20 and he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what
their end shall be: for they are a veri froward generation, children
in whom is no faith.

32:21 they have move me to jealousi with that which is not god; they
hav provok me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to
jealousi with those which are not a people; I will provok them to
ang with a foolish nation.

32:22 for a fire is kindl in mine anger, and shall burn unto the
lowest hell, and shall consum the earth with her increase, and set on
fir the foundat of the mountains.

32:23 I will heap mischief upon them; I will spend mine arrow upon
them.

32:24 they shall be burnt with hunger, and devour with burn heat,
and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beast upon
them, with the poison of serpent of the dust.

32:25 the sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the
young man and the virgin, the suckl also with the man of gray
hairs.

32:26 I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the
remembr of them to ceas from among men: 32:27 were it not that i
fear the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversari should behave
themselv strangely, and lest they should say, our hand is high, and
th lord hath not done all this.

32:28 for they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any
understand in them.

32:29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consid their latter end!  32:30 how should one chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their rock had
sold them, and the lord had shut them up?  32:31 for their rock is not
a our rock, even our enemi themselv be judges.

32:32 for their vine is of the vine of sodom, and of the field of
gomorrah: their grape are grape of gall, their cluster are bitter:
32:33 their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of
asps.

32:34 Is not thi laid up in store with me, and seal up among my
treasures?  32:35 To me belongeth vengeanc and recompence; their foot
shal slide in due time: for the day of their calam is at hand, and
th thing that shall come upon them make haste.

32:36 for the lord shall judg hi people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none
shut up, or left.

32:37 and he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they
trusted, 32:38 which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank
th wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and
b your protection.

32:39 see now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: i
kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there ani that
can deliv out of my hand.

32:40 for I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

32:41 If I whet my glitter sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgment; I will render vengeanc to mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me.

32:42 I will make mine arrow drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the
captives, from the begin of reveng upon the enemy.

32:43 rejoice, O ye nations, with hi people: for he will aveng the
blood of hi servants, and will render vengeanc to hi adversaries,
and will be merci unto hi land, and to hi people.

32:44 and mose came and spake all the word of thi song in the ears
of the people, he, and hoshea the son of nun.

32:45 and mose made an end of speak all these word to all israel:
32:46 and he said unto them, set your heart unto all the word which
i testifi among you thi day, which ye shall command your children to
observ to do, all the word of thi law.

32:47 for it is not a vain thing for you; becaus it is your life: and
through thi thing ye shall prolong your day in the land, whither ye
go over jordan to possess it.

32:48 and the lord spake unto mose that selfsam day, saying, 32:49
get thee up into thi mountain abarim, unto mount nebo, which is in
th land of moab, that is over against jericho; and behold the land of
canaan, which I give unto the children of israel for a possession:
32:50 and die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gather unto
thi people; as aaron thi brother die in mount hor, and wa gathered
unto hi people: 32:51 becaus ye trespass against me among the
children of israel at the water of meribahkadesh, in the wilderness
of zin; becaus ye sanctifi me not in the midst of the children of
israel.

32:52 yet thou shalt see the land befor thee; but thou shalt not go
thith unto the land which I give the children of israel.

33:1 and thi is the blessing, wherewith mose the man of god blessed
th children of israel befor hi death.

33:2 and he said, the lord came from sinai, and rose up from seir unto
them; he shine forth from mount paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from hi right hand went a fieri law for them.

33:3 yea, he love the people; all hi saint are in thi hand: and
they sat down at thi feet; everi one shall receiv of thi words.

33:4 mose command us a law, even the inherit of the
congreg of jacob.

33:5 and he wa king in jeshurun, when the head of the peopl and the
trib of israel were gather together.

33:6 let reuben live, and not die; and let not hi men be few.

33:7 and thi is the bless of judah: and he said, hear, lord, the
voic of judah, and bring him unto hi people: let hi hand be
suffici for him; and be thou an help to him from hi enemies.

33:8 and of levi he said, let thi thummim and thi urim be with thy
holi one, whom thou didst prove at massah, and with whom thou didst
striv at the water of meribah; 33:9 who said unto hi father and to
hi mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledg his
brethren, nor knew hi own children: for they have observ thi word,
and kept thi covenant.

33:10 they shall teach jacob thi judgments, and israel thi law: they
shal put incens befor thee, and whole burnt sacrific upon thine
altar.

33:11 bless, lord, hi substance, and accept the work of hi hands;
smit through the loin of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again.

33:12 and of benjamin he said, the belov of the lord shall dwell in
safeti by him; and the lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shal dwell between hi shoulders.

33:13 and of joseph he said, bless of the lord be hi land, for the
preci thing of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
beneath, 33:14 and for the preciou fruit brought forth by the sun,
and for the preciou thing put forth by the moon, 33:15 and for the
chief thing of the ancient mountains, and for the preciou thing of
th last hills, 33:16 and for the preciou thing of the earth and
 thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush:
let the bless come upon the head of joseph, and upon the top of the
head of him that wa separ from hi brethren.

33:17 hi glori is like the firstl of hi bullock, and hi horns
ar like the horn of unicorns: with them he shall push the people
togeth to the end of the earth: and they are the ten thousand of
ephraim, and they are the thousand of manasseh.

33:18 and of zebulun he said, rejoice, zebulun, in thi go out; and,
issachar, in thi tents.

33:19 they shall call the peopl unto the mountain; there they shall
off sacrific of righteousness: for they shall suck of the
abund of the seas, and of treasur hid in the sand.

33:20 and of gad he said, bless be he that enlargeth gad: he
dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.

33:21 and he provid the first part for himself, becaus there, in a
port of the lawgiver, wa he seated; and he came with the head of
th people, he execut the justic of the lord, and hi judgments
with israel.

33:22 and of dan he said, dan is a lion' whelp: he shall leap from
bashan.

33:23 and of naphtali he said, O naphtali, satisfi with favour, and
ful with the bless of the lord: possess thou the west and the
south.

33:24 and of asher he said, let asher be bless with children; let
him be accept to hi brethren, and let him dip hi foot in oil.

33:25 thi shoe shall be iron and brass; and as thi days, so shall thy
strength be.

33:26 there is none like unto the god of jeshurun, who rideth upon the
heaven in thi help, and in hi excel on the sky.

33:27 the etern god is thi refuge, and underneath are the
everlast arms: and he shall thrust out the enemi from befor thee;
and shall say, destroy them.

33:28 israel then shall dwell in safeti alone: the fountain of jacob
shal be upon a land of corn and wine; also hi heaven shall drop
down dew.

33:29 happi art thou, O israel: who is like unto thee, O peopl saved
bi the lord, the shield of thi help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemi shall be found liar unto thee; and thou
shalt tread upon their high places.

34:1 and mose went up from the plain of moab unto the mountain of
nebo, to the top of pisgah, that is over against jericho. and the lord
shew him all the land of gilead, unto dan, 34:2 and all naphtali,
and the land of ephraim, and manasseh, and all the land of judah, unto
th utmost sea, 34:3 and the south, and the plain of the valley of
jericho, the citi of palm trees, unto zoar.

34:4 and the lord said unto him, thi is the land which I sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy
seed: I have caus thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 So mose the servant of the lord die there in the land of moab,
accord to the word of the lord.

34:6 and he buri him in a valley in the land of moab, over against
bethpeor: but no man knoweth of hi sepulchr unto thi day.

34:7 and mose wa an hundr and twenti year old when he died: his
ey wa not dim, nor hi natur forc abated.

34:8 and the children of israel wept for mose in the plain of moab
thirti days: so the day of weep and mourn for mose were ended.

34:9 and joshua the son of nun wa full of the spirit of wisdom; for
mos had laid hi hand upon him: and the children of israel
hearken unto him, and did as the lord command moses.

34:10 and there aros not a prophet sinc in israel like unto moses,
whom the lord knew face to face, 34:11 In all the sign and the
wonders, which the lord sent him to do in the land of egypt to
pharaoh, and to all hi servants, and to all hi land, 34:12 and in
al that mighti hand, and in all the great terror which mose shewed
in the sight of all israel.




th book of joshua


1:1 now after the death of mose the servant of the lord it came to
pass, that the lord spake unto joshua the son of nun, moses' minister,
saying, 1:2 mose my servant is dead; now therefor arise, go over
thi jordan, thou, and all thi people, unto the land which I do give
to them, even to the children of israel.

1:3 everi place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have
i given unto you, as I said unto moses.

1:4 from the wilder and thi lebanon even unto the great river,
th river euphrates, all the land of the hittites, and unto the great
sea toward the go down of the sun, shall be your coast.

1:5 there shall not ani man be abl to stand befor thee all the days
of thi life: as I wa with moses, so I will be with thee: I will not
fail thee, nor forsak thee.

1:6 Be strong and of a good courage: for unto thi peopl shalt thou
divid for an inherit the land, which I sware unto their fathers
to give them.

1:7 onli be thou strong and veri courageous, that thou mayest observe
to do accord to all the law, which mose my servant command thee:
turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
prosp withersoev thou goest.

1:8 thi book of the law shall not depart out of thi mouth; but thou
shalt medit therein day and night, that thou mayest observ to do
accord to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

1:9 have not I command thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the lord thi god is with thee
whithersoev thou goest.

1:10 then joshua command the offic of the people, saying, 1:11
pass through the host, and command the people, saying, prepar you
victuals; for within three day ye shall pass over thi jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the lord your god giveth you to possess
it.

1:12 and to the reubenites, and to the gadites, and to half the tribe
of manasseh, spake joshua, saying, 1:13 rememb the word which moses
th servant of the lord command you, saying, the lord your god hath
given you rest, and hath given you thi land.

1:14 your wives, your littl ones, and your cattle, shall remain in
th land which mose gave you on thi side jordan; but ye shall pass
befor your brethren armed, all the mighti men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 until the lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possess the land which the lord your
god giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which mose the lord' servant gave you on
thi side jordan toward the sunrising.

1:16 and they answer joshua, saying, all that thou commandest us we
wil do, and whithersoev thou sendest us, we will go.

1:17 accord as we hearken unto mose in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: onli the lord thi god be with thee, as he wa with
moses.

1:18 whosoev he be that doth rebel against thi commandment, and will
not hearken unto thi word in all that thou commandest him, he shall
b put to death: onli be strong and of a good courage.

2:1 and joshua the son of nun sent out of shittim two men to spy
secretly, saying, Go view the land, even jericho. and they went, and
cam into an harlot' house, name rahab, and lodg there.

2:2 and it wa told the king of jericho, saying, behold, there came
men in hither to night of the children of israel to search out the
country.

2:3 and the king of jericho sent unto rahab, saying, bring forth the
men that are come to thee, which are enter into thine house: for
they be come to search out all the country.

2:4 and the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, there
cam men unto me, but I wist not whenc they were: 2:5 and it came to
pass about the time of shut of the gate, when it wa dark, that
th men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursu after them
quickly; for ye shall overtak them.

2:6 but she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them
with the stalk of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.

2:7 and the men pursu after them the way to jordan unto the fords:
and as soon as they which pursu after them were gone out, they shut
th gate.

2:8 and befor they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the
roof; 2:9 and she said unto the men, I know that the lord hath given
y the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
inhabit of the land faint becaus of you.

2:10 for we have heard how the lord dri up the water of the red sea
for you, when ye came out of egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings
of the amorites, that were on the other side jordan, sihon and og,
whom ye utterli destroyed.

2:11 and as soon as we had heard these things, our heart did melt,
neith did there remain ani more courag in ani man, becaus of you:
for the lord your god, he is god in heaven above, and in earth
beneath.

2:12 now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the lord, sinc i
hav shew you kindness, that ye will also shew kind unto my
father' house, and give me a true token: 2:13 and that ye will save
al my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and
al that they have, and deliv our live from death.

2:14 and the men answer her, our life for yours, if ye utter not
thi our business. and it shall be, when the lord hath given us the
land, that we will deal kindli and truli with thee.

2:15 then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her
hous wa upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.

2:16 and she said unto them, get you to the mountain, lest the
pursu meet you; and hide yourselv there three days, until the
pursu be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.

2:17 and the men said unto her, We will be blameless of thi thine
oath which thou hast made us swear.

2:18 behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind thi line of
scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou
shalt bring thi father, and thi mother, and thi brethren, and all thy
father' household, home unto thee.

2:19 and it shall be, that whosoev shall go out of the door of thy
hous into the street, hi blood shall be upon hi head, and we will
b guiltless: and whosoev shall be with thee in the house, hi blood
shal be on our head, if ani hand be upon him.

2:20 and if thou utter thi our business, then we will be quit of
thin oath which thou hast made us to swear.

2:21 and she said, accord unto your words, so be it. and she sent
them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the
window.

2:22 and they went, and came unto the mountain, and abod there three
days, until the pursuer were returned: and the pursuer sought them
throughout all the way, but found them not.

2:23 So the two men returned, and descend from the mountain, and
pass over, and came to joshua the son of nun, and told him all
th that befel them: 2:24 and they said unto joshua, truli the
lord hath deliv into our hand all the land; for even all the
inhabit of the countri do faint becaus of us.

3:1 and joshua rose earli in the morning; and they remov from
shittim, and came to jordan, he and all the children of israel, and
lodg there befor they pass over.

3:2 and it came to pass after three days, that the offic went
through the host; 3:3 and they command the people, saying, when ye
se the ark of the coven of the lord your god, and the priest the
levit bear it, then ye shall remov from your place, and go after
it.

3:4 yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubit by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
which ye must go: for ye have not pass thi way heretofore.

3:5 and joshua said unto the people, sanctifi yourselves: for to
morrow the lord will do wonder among you.

3:6 and joshua spake unto the priests, saying, take up the ark of the
covenant, and pass over befor the people. and they took up the ark of
th covenant, and went befor the people.

3:7 and the lord said unto joshua, thi day will I begin to magnify
the in the sight of all israel, that they may know that, as I was
with moses, so I will be with thee.

3:8 and thou shalt command the priest that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, when ye are come to the brink of the water of
jordan, ye shall stand still in jordan.

3:9 and joshua said unto the children of israel, come hither, and hear
th word of the lord your god.

3:10 and joshua said, herebi ye shall know that the live god is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from befor you the
canaanites, and the hittites, and the hivites, and the perizzites, and
th girgashites, and the amorites, and the jebusites.

3:11 behold, the ark of the coven of the lord of all the earth
passeth over befor you into jordan.

3:12 now therefor take you twelv men out of the tribe of israel,
out of everi tribe a man.

3:13 and it shall come to pass, as soon as the sole of the feet of
th priest that bear the ark of the lord, the lord of all the earth,
shal rest in the water of jordan, that the water of jordan shall be
cut off from the water that come down from above; and they shall
stand upon an heap.

3:14 and it came to pass, when the peopl remov from their tents, to
pass over jordan, and the priest bear the ark of the covenant
befor the people; 3:15 and as they that bare the ark were come unto
jordan, and the feet of the priest that bare the ark were dip in
th brim of the water, (for jordan overfloweth all hi bank all the
tim of harvest,) 3:16 that the water which came down from above
stood and rose up upon an heap veri far from the citi adam, that is
besid zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain,
even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the peopl passed
ov right against jericho.

3:17 and the priest that bare the ark of the coven of the lord
stood firm on dri ground in the midst of jordan, and all the
israelit pass over on dri ground, until all the peopl were passed
clean over jordan.

4:1 and it came to pass, when all the peopl were clean pass over
jordan, that the lord spake unto joshua, saying, 4:2 take you twelve
men out of the people, out of everi tribe a man, 4:3 and command ye
them, saying, take you henc out of the midst of jordan, out of the
plac where the priests' feet stood firm, twelv stones, and ye shall
carri them over with you, and leav them in the lodg place, where
y shall lodg thi night.

4:4 then joshua call the twelv men, whom he had prepar of the
children of israel, out of everi tribe a man: 4:5 and joshua said unto
them, pass over befor the ark of the lord your god into the midst of
jordan, and take you up everi man of you a stone upon hi shoulder,
accord unto the number of the tribe of the children of israel: 4:6
that thi may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fath in time to come, saying, what mean ye by these stones?  4:7
then ye shall answer them, that the water of jordan were cut off
befor the ark of the coven of the lord; when it pass over
jordan, the water of jordan were cut off: and these stone shall be
for a memori unto the children of israel for ever.

4:8 and the children of israel did so as joshua commanded, and took up
twelv stone out of the midst of jordan, as the lord spake unto
joshua, accord to the number of the tribe of the children of
israel, and carri them over with them unto the place where they
lodged, and laid them down there.

4:9 and joshua set up twelv stone in the midst of jordan, in the
plac where the feet of the priest which bare the ark of the covenant
stood: and they are there unto thi day.

4:10 for the priest which bare the ark stood in the midst of jordan,
until everyth wa finish that the lord command joshua to speak
unto the people, accord to all that mose command joshua: and the
peopl hast and pass over.

4:11 and it came to pass, when all the peopl were clean pass over,
that the ark of the lord pass over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people.

4:12 and the children of reuben, and the children of gad, and half the
trib of manasseh, pass over arm befor the children of israel, as
mos spake unto them: 4:13 about forti thousand prepar for war
pass over befor the lord unto battle, to the plain of jericho.

4:14 On that day the lord magnifi joshua in the sight of all israel;
and they fear him, as they fear moses, all the day of hi life.

4:15 and the lord spake unto joshua, saying, 4:16 command the priests
that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of jordan.

4:17 joshua therefor command the priests, saying, come ye up out of
jordan.

4:18 and it came to pass, when the priest that bare the ark of the
coven of the lord were come up out of the midst of jordan, and the
sol of the priests' feet were lift up unto the dri land, that the
wat of jordan return unto their place, and flow over all his
banks, as they did before.

4:19 and the peopl came up out of jordan on the tenth day of the
first month, and encamp in gilgal, in the east border of jericho.

4:20 and those twelv stones, which they took out of jordan, did
joshua pitch in gilgal.

4:21 and he spake unto the children of israel, saying, when your
children shall ask their father in time to come, saying, what mean
thes stones?  4:22 then ye shall let your children know, saying,
israel came over thi jordan on dri land.

4:23 for the lord your god dri up the water of jordan from before
you, until ye were pass over, as the lord your god did to the red
sea, which he dri up from befor us, until we were gone over: 4:24
that all the peopl of the earth might know the hand of the lord, that
it is mighty: that ye might fear the lord your god for ever.

5:1 and it came to pass, when all the king of the amorites, which
wer on the side of jordan westward, and all the king of the
canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the lord had dri up
th water of jordan from befor the children of israel, until we were
pass over, that their heart melted, neither wa there spirit in them
ani more, becaus of the children of israel.

5:2 At that time the lord said unto joshua, make thee sharp knives,
and circumcis again the children of israel the second time.

5:3 and joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcis the children of
israel at the hill of the foreskins.

5:4 and thi is the caus whi joshua did circumcise: all the people
that came out of egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died
in the wilder by the way, after they came out of egypt.

5:5 now all the peopl that came out were circumcised: but all the
peopl that were born in the wilder by the way as they came forth
out of egypt, them they had not circumcised.

5:6 for the children of israel walk forti year in the wilderness,
til all the peopl that were men of war, which came out of egypt,
wer consumed, becaus they obey not the voic of the lord: unto
whom the lord sware that he would not shew them the land, which the
lord sware unto their father that he would give us, a land that
floweth with milk and honey.

5:7 and their children, whom he rais up in their stead, them joshua
circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, becaus they had not
circumcis them by the way.

5:8 and it came to pass, when they had done circumcis all the
people, that they abod in their place in the camp, till they were
whole.

5:9 and the lord said unto joshua, thi day have I roll away the
reproach of egypt from off you. wherefor the name of the place is
cal gilgal unto thi day.

5:10 and the children of israel encamp in gilgal, and kept the
passov on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plain of
jericho.

5:11 and they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after
th passover, unleaven cakes, and parch corn in the selfsam day.

5:12 and the manna ceas on the morrow after they had eaten of the
old corn of the land; neither had the children of israel manna any
more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of canaan that year.

5:13 and it came to pass, when joshua wa by jericho, that he lifted
up hi eye and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against
him with hi sword drawn in hi hand: and joshua went unto him, and
said unto him, art thou for us, or for our adversaries?  5:14 and he
said, nay; but as captain of the host of the lord am I now come. and
joshua fell on hi face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto
him, what saith my lord unto hi servant?  5:15 and the captain of the
lord' host said unto joshua, loos thi shoe from off thi foot; for
th place whereon thou standest is holy. and joshua did so.

6:1 now jericho wa straitli shut up becaus of the children of
israel: none went out, and none came in.

6:2 and the lord said unto joshua, see, I have given into thine hand
jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighti men of valour.

6:3 and ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round
about the citi once. thu shalt thou do six days.

6:4 and seven priest shall bear befor the ark seven trumpet of
rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the citi seven
times, and the priest shall blow with the trumpets.

6:5 and it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with
th ram' horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the
peopl shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the citi shall
fal down flat, and the peopl shall ascend up everi man straight
befor him.

6:6 and joshua the son of nun call the priests, and said unto them,
tak up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priest bear seven
trumpet of rams' horn befor the ark of the lord.

6:7 and he said unto the people, pass on, and compass the city, and
let him that is arm pass on befor the ark of the lord.

6:8 and it came to pass, when joshua had spoken unto the people, that
th seven priest bear the seven trumpet of rams' horn pass on
befor the lord, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the
coven of the lord follow them.

6:9 and the arm men went befor the priest that blew with the
trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priest go on,
and blow with the trumpets.

6:10 and joshua had command the people, saying, Ye shall not shout,
nor make ani nois with your voice, neither shall ani word proceed out
of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.

6:11 So the ark of the lord compass the city, go about it once:
and they came into the camp, and lodg in the camp.

6:12 and joshua rose earli in the morning, and the priest took up the
ark of the lord.

6:13 and seven priest bear seven trumpet of rams' horn before
th ark of the lord went on continually, and blew with the trumpets:
and the arm men went befor them; but the rereward came after the
ark of the lord, the priest go on, and blow with the trumpets.

6:14 and the second day they compass the citi once, and returned
into the camp: so they did six days.

6:15 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early
about the dawn of the day, and compass the citi after the same
mann seven times: onli on that day they compass the citi seven
times.

6:16 and it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priest blew
with the trumpets, joshua said unto the people, shout; for the lord
hath given you the city.

6:17 and the citi shall be accursed, even it, and all that are
therein, to the lord: onli rahab the harlot shall live, she and all
that are with her in the house, becaus she hid the messeng that we
sent.

6:18 and ye, in ani wise keep yourselv from the accurs thing, lest
y make yourselv accursed, when ye take of the accurs thing, and
mak the camp of israel a curse, and troubl it.

6:19 but all the silver, and gold, and vessel of brass and iron, are
consecr unto the lord: they shall come into the treasuri of the
lord.

6:20 So the peopl shout when the priest blew with the trumpets:
and it came to pass, when the peopl heard the sound of the trumpet,
and the peopl shout with a great shout, that the wall fell down
flat, so that the peopl went up into the city, everi man straight
befor him, and they took the city.

6:21 and they utterli destroy all that wa in the city, both man and
woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edg of the
sword.

6:22 but joshua had said unto the two men that had spi out the
country, Go into the harlot' house, and bring out thenc the woman,
and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.

6:23 and the young men that were spi went in, and brought out rahab,
and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she
had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the
camp of israel.

6:24 and they burnt the citi with fire, and all that wa therein: only
th silver, and the gold, and the vessel of brass and of iron, they
put into the treasuri of the hous of the lord.

6:25 and joshua save rahab the harlot alive, and her father's
household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in israel even unto
thi day; becaus she hid the messengers, which joshua sent to spi out
jericho.

6:26 and joshua adjur them at that time, saying, curs be the man
befor the lord, that riseth up and buildeth thi citi jericho: he
shal lay the foundat thereof in hi firstborn, and in hi youngest
son shall he set up the gate of it.

6:27 So the lord wa with joshua; and hi fame wa nois throughout
al the country.

7:1 but the children of israel commit a trespass in the accursed
thing: for achan, the son of carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of
zerah, of the tribe of judah, took of the accurs thing: and the
ang of the lord wa kindl against the children of israel.

7:2 and joshua sent men from jericho to ai, which is besid bethaven,
on the east of bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the
country.

and the men went up and view ai.

7:3 and they return to joshua, and said unto him, let not all the
peopl go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite
ai; and make not all the peopl to labour thither; for they are but
few.

7:4 So there went up thither of the peopl about three thousand men:
and they fled befor the men of ai.

7:5 and the men of Ai smote of them about thirti and six men: for they
chas them from befor the gate even unto shebarim, and smote them in
th go down: wherefor the heart of the peopl melted, and became
a water.

7:6 and joshua rent hi clothes, and fell to the earth upon hi face
befor the ark of the lord until the eventide, he and the elder of
israel, and put dust upon their heads.

7:7 and joshua said, alas, O lord god, wherefor hast thou at all
brought thi peopl over jordan, to deliv us into the hand of the
amorites, to destroy us? would to god we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side jordan!  7:8 O lord, what shall I say, when israel
turneth their back befor their enemies!  7:9 for the canaanit and
al the inhabit of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto
thi great name?  7:10 and the lord said unto joshua, get thee up;
wherefor liest thou thu upon thi face?  7:11 israel hath sinned, and
they have also transgress my coven which I command them: for
they have even taken of the accurs thing, and have also stolen, and
dissembl also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.

7:12 therefor the children of israel could not stand befor their
enemies, but turn their back befor their enemies, becaus they
wer accursed: neither will I be with you ani more, except ye destroy
th accurs from among you.

7:13 up, sanctifi the people, and say, sanctifi yourselv against to
morrow: for thu saith the lord god of israel, there is an accursed
th in the midst of thee, O israel: thou canst not stand before
thin enemies, until ye take away the accurs thing from among you.

7:14 In the morn therefor ye shall be brought accord to your
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the lord taketh shall
com accord to the famili thereof; and the famili which the lord
shal take shall come by households; and the household which the lord
shal take shall come man by man.

7:15 and it shall be, that he that is taken with the accurs thing
shal be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: becaus he hath
transgress the coven of the lord, and becaus he hath wrought
folli in israel.

7:16 So joshua rose up earli in the morning, and brought israel by
their tribes; and the tribe of judah wa taken: 7:17 and he brought
th famili of judah; and he took the famili of the zarhites: and he
brought the famili of the zarhit man by man; and zabdi wa taken:
7:18 and he brought hi household man by man; and achan, the son of
carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of zerah, of the tribe of judah, was
taken.

7:19 and joshua said unto achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glori to
th lord god of israel, and make confess unto him; and tell me now
what thou hast done; hide it not from me.

7:20 and achan answer joshua, and said, inde I have sin against
th lord god of israel, and thu and thu have I done: 7:21 when I saw
among the spoil a goodli babylonish garment, and two hundr shekels
of silver, and a wedg of gold of fifti shekel weight, then I coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the
midst of my tent, and the silver under it.

7:22 So joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and,
behold, it wa hid in hi tent, and the silver under it.

7:23 and they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them
unto joshua, and unto all the children of israel, and laid them out
befor the lord.

7:24 and joshua, and all israel with him, took achan the son of zerah,
and the silver, and the garment, and the wedg of gold, and hi sons,
and hi daughters, and hi oxen, and hi asses, and hi sheep, and his
tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
achor.

7:25 and joshua said, whi hast thou troubl us? the lord shall
troubl thee thi day. and all israel stone him with stones, and
burn them with fire, after they had stone them with stones.

7:26 and they rais over him a great heap of stone unto thi day. so
th lord turn from the fierc of hi anger. wherefor the name
of that place wa called, the valley of achor, unto thi day.

8:1 and the lord said unto joshua, fear not, neither be thou dismayed:
tak all the peopl of war with thee, and arise, go up to ai: see, i
hav given into thi hand the king of ai, and hi people, and hi city,
and hi land: 8:2 and thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst
unto jericho and her king: onli the spoil thereof, and the cattle
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the citi behind it.

8:3 So joshua arose, and all the peopl of war, to go up against ai:
and joshua chose out thirti thousand mighti men of valour, and sent
them away by night.

8:4 and he command them, saying, behold, ye shall lie in wait
against the city, even behind the city: go not veri far from the city,
but be ye all ready: 8:5 and I, and all the peopl that are with me,
wil approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come
out against us, as at the first, that we will flee befor them, 8:6
(for they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
city; for they will say, they flee befor us, as at the first:
therefor we will flee befor them.

8:7 then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seiz upon the city:
for the lord your god will deliv it into your hand.

8:8 and it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set
th citi on fire: accord to the command of the lord shall ye
do. see, I have command you.

8:9 joshua therefor sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush,
and abod between bethel and ai, on the west side of ai: but joshua
lodg that night among the people.

8:10 and joshua rose up earli in the morning, and number the people,
and went up, he and the elder of israel, befor the peopl to ai.

8:11 and all the people, even the peopl of war that were with him,
went up, and drew nigh, and came befor the city, and pitch on the
north side of ai: now there wa a valley between them and ai.

8:12 and he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in
ambush between bethel and ai, on the west side of the city.

8:13 and when they had set the people, even all the host that wa on
th north of the city, and their lier in wait on the west of the
city, joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.

8:14 and it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted
and rose up early, and the men of the citi went out against israel to
battle, he and all hi people, at a time appointed, befor the plain;
but he wist not that there were lier in ambush against him behind the
city.

8:15 and joshua and all israel made as if they were beaten before
them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.

8:16 and all the peopl that were in Ai were call togeth to pursue
aft them: and they pursu after joshua, and were drawn away from
th city.

8:17 and there wa not a man left in Ai or bethel, that went not out
aft israel: and they left the citi open, and pursu after israel.

8:18 and the lord said unto joshua, stretch out the spear that is in
thi hand toward ai; for I will give it into thine hand. and joshua
stretch out the spear that he had in hi hand toward the city.

8:19 and the ambush aros quickli out of their place, and they ran as
soon as he had stretch out hi hand: and they enter into the city,
and took it, and hast and set the citi on fire.

8:20 and when the men of Ai look behind them, they saw, and, behold,
th smoke of the citi ascend up to heaven, and they had no power to
fle thi way or that way: and the peopl that fled to the wilderness
turn back upon the pursuers.

8:21 and when joshua and all israel saw that the ambush had taken the
city, and that the smoke of the citi ascended, then they turn again,
and slew the men of ai.

8:22 and the other issu out of the citi against them; so they were
in the midst of israel, some on thi side, and some on that side: and
they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.

8:23 and the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to joshua.

8:24 and it came to pass, when israel had made an end of slay all
th inhabit of Ai in the field, in the wilder wherein they
chas them, and when they were all fallen on the edg of the sword,
until they were consumed, that all the israelit return unto ai,
and smote it with the edg of the sword.

8:25 and so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and
women, were twelv thousand, even all the men of ai.

8:26 for joshua drew not hi hand back, wherewith he stretch out the
spear, until he had utterli destroy all the inhabit of ai.

8:27 onli the cattl and the spoil of that citi israel took for a prey
unto themselves, accord unto the word of the lord which he
command joshua.

8:28 and joshua burnt ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desol unto thi day.

8:29 and the king of Ai he hang on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun wa down, joshua command that they should take his
carcas down from the tree, and cast it at the enter of the gate of
th city, and rais thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto thi day.

8:30 then joshua built an altar unto the lord god of israel in mount
ebal, 8:31 As mose the servant of the lord command the children of
israel, as it is written in the book of the law of moses, an altar of
whol stones, over which no man hath lift up ani iron: and they
off thereon burnt offer unto the lord, and sacrif peace
offerings.

8:32 and he wrote there upon the stone a copi of the law of moses,
which he wrote in the presenc of the children of israel.

8:33 and all israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges,
stood on thi side the ark and on that side befor the priest the
levites, which bare the ark of the coven of the lord, as well the
stranger, as he that wa born among them; half of them over against
mount gerizim, and half of them over against mount ebal; as mose the
serv of the lord had command before, that they should bless the
peopl of israel.

8:34 and afterward he read all the word of the law, the bless and
cursings, accord to all that is written in the book of the law.

8:35 there wa not a word of all that mose commanded, which joshua
read not befor all the congreg of israel, with the women, and
th littl ones, and the stranger that were convers among them.

9:1 and it came to pass, when all the king which were on thi side
jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coast of the
great sea over against lebanon, the hittite, and the amorite, the
canaanite, the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite, heard thereof;
9:2 that they gather themselv together, to fight with joshua and
with israel, with one accord.

9:3 and when the inhabit of gibeon heard what joshua had done unto
jericho and to ai, 9:4 they did work wilily, and went and made as if
they had been ambassadors, and took old sack upon their asses, and
win bottles, old, and rent, and bound up; 9:5 and old shoe and
clout upon their feet, and old garment upon them; and all the bread
of their provis wa dri and mouldy.

9:6 and they went to joshua unto the camp at gilgal, and said unto
him, and to the men of israel, We be come from a far country: now
therefor make ye a leagu with us.

9:7 and the men of israel said unto the hivites, peradventur ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a leagu with you?  9:8 and they said
unto joshua, We are thi servants. and joshua said unto them, who are
ye? and from whenc come ye?  9:9 and they said unto him, from a very
far countri thi servant are come becaus of the name of the lord thy
god: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in egypt,
9:10 and all that he did to the two king of the amorites, that were
beyond jordan, to sihon king of heshbon, and to Og king of bashan,
which wa at ashtaroth.

9:11 wherefor our elder and all the inhabit of our countri spake
to us, saying, take victual with you for the journey, and go to meet
them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefor now make ye a
leagu with us.

9:12 thi our bread we took hot for our provis out of our hous on
th day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and
it is mouldy: 9:13 and these bottl of wine, which we filled, were
new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garment and our shoes
ar becom old by reason of the veri long journey.

9:14 and the men took of their victuals, and ask not counsel at the
mouth of the lord.

9:15 and joshua made peac with them, and made a leagu with them, to
let them live: and the princ of the congreg sware unto them.

9:16 and it came to pass at the end of three day after they had made
a leagu with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours,
and that they dwelt among them.

9:17 and the children of israel journeyed, and came unto their cities
on the third day. now their citi were gibeon, and chephirah, and
beeroth, and kirjathjearim.

9:18 and the children of israel smote them not, becaus the princ of
th congreg had sworn unto them by the lord god of israel. and
al the congreg murmur against the princes.

9:19 but all the princ said unto all the congregation, We have sworn
unto them by the lord god of israel: now therefor we may not touch
them.

9:20 thi we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath
b upon us, becaus of the oath which we sware unto them.

9:21 and the princ said unto them, let them live; but let them be
hew of wood and drawer of water unto all the congregation; as the
princ had promis them.

9:22 and joshua call for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
wherefor have ye beguil us, saying, We are veri far from you; when
y dwell among us?  9:23 now therefor ye are cursed, and there shall
non of you be freed from be bondmen, and hewer of wood and
draw of water for the hous of my god.

9:24 and they answer joshua, and said, becaus it wa certainli told
thi servants, how that the lord thi god command hi servant mose to
giv you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabit of the land
from befor you, therefor we were sore afraid of our live becaus of
you, and have done thi thing.

9:25 and now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do.

9:26 and so did he unto them, and deliv them out of the hand of
th children of israel, that they slew them not.

9:27 and joshua made them that day hewer of wood and drawer of water
for the congregation, and for the altar of the lord, even unto this
day, in the place which he should choose.

10:1 now it came to pass, when adonizedec king of jerusalem had heard
how joshua had taken ai, and had utterli destroy it; as he had done
to jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how
th inhabit of gibeon had made peac with israel, and were among
them; 10:2 that they fear greatly, becaus gibeon wa a great city,
a one of the royal cities, and becaus it wa greater than ai, and
al the men thereof were mighty.

10:3 wherefor adonizedec king of jerusalem, sent unto hoham king of
hebron, and unto piram king of jarmuth, and unto japhia king of
lachish, and unto debir king of eglon, saying, 10:4 come up unto me,
and help me, that we may smite gibeon: for it hath made peac with
joshua and with the children of israel.

10:5 therefor the five king of the amorites, the king of jerusalem,
th king of hebron, the king of jarmuth, the king of lachish, the king
of eglon, gather themselv together, and went up, they and all
their hosts, and encamp befor gibeon, and made war against it.

10:6 and the men of gibeon sent unto joshua to the camp to gilgal,
saying, slack not thi hand from thi servants; come up to us quickly,
and save us, and help us: for all the king of the amorit that dwell
in the mountain are gather togeth against us.

10:7 So joshua ascend from gilgal, he, and all the peopl of war
with him, and all the mighti men of valour.

10:8 and the lord said unto joshua, fear them not: for I have
deliv them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand
befor thee.

10:9 joshua therefor came unto them suddenly, and went up from gilgal
al night.

10:10 and the lord discomfit them befor israel, and slew them with
a great slaughter at gibeon, and chase them along the way that goeth
up to bethhoron, and smote them to azekah, and unto makkedah.

10:11 and it came to pass, as they fled from befor israel, and were
in the go down to bethhoron, that the lord cast down great stones
from heaven upon them unto azekah, and they died: they were more which
di with hailston than they whom the children of israel slew with
th sword.

10:12 then spake joshua to the lord in the day when the lord delivered
up the amorit befor the children of israel, and he said in the
sight of israel, sun, stand thou still upon gibeon; and thou, moon, in
th valley of ajalon.

10:13 and the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people
had aveng themselv upon their enemies. Is not thi written in the
book of jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hast not to go down about a whole day.

10:14 and there wa no day like that befor it or after it, that the
lord hearken unto the voic of a man: for the lord fought for
israel.

10:15 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

10:16 but these five king fled, and hid themselv in a cave at
makkedah.

10:17 and it wa told joshua, saying, the five king are found hid in
a cave at makkedah.

10:18 and joshua said, roll great stone upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: 10:19 and stay ye not, but pursue
aft your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
ent into their cities: for the lord your god hath deliv them
into your hand.

10:20 and it came to pass, when joshua and the children of israel had
mad an end of slay them with a veri great slaughter, till they
wer consumed, that the rest which remain of them enter into
fenc cities.

10:21 and all the peopl return to the camp to joshua at makkedah in
peace: none move hi tongu against ani of the children of israel.

10:22 then said joshua, open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
thos five king unto me out of the cave.

10:23 and they did so, and brought forth those five king unto him out
of the cave, the king of jerusalem, the king of hebron, the king of
jarmuth, the king of lachish, and the king of eglon.

10:24 and it came to pass, when they brought out those king unto
joshua, that joshua call for all the men of israel, and said unto
th captain of the men of war which went with him, come near, put
your feet upon the neck of these kings. and they came near, and put
their feet upon the neck of them.

10:25 and joshua said unto them, fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong
and of good courage: for thu shall the lord do to all your enemies
against whom ye fight.

10:26 and afterward joshua smote them, and slew them, and hang them
on five trees: and they were hang upon the tree until the evening.

10:27 and it came to pass at the time of the go down of the sun,
that joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast
them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stone in
th cave' mouth, which remain until thi veri day.

10:28 and that day joshua took makkedah, and smote it with the edg of
th sword, and the king thereof he utterli destroyed, them, and all
th soul that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the
k of makkedah as he did unto the king of jericho.

10:29 then joshua pass from makkedah, and all israel with him, unto
libnah, and fought against libnah: 10:30 and the lord deliv it
also, and the king thereof, into the hand of israel; and he smote it
with the edg of the sword, and all the soul that were therein; he
let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto
th king of jericho.

10:31 and joshua pass from libnah, and all israel with him, unto
lachish, and encamp against it, and fought against it: 10:32 and the
lord deliv lachish into the hand of israel, which took it on the
second day, and smote it with the edg of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein, accord to all that he had done to libnah.

10:33 then horam king of gezer came up to help lachish; and joshua
smot him and hi people, until he had left him none remaining.

10:34 and from lachish joshua pass unto eglon, and all israel with
him; and they encamp against it, and fought against it: 10:35 and
they took it on that day, and smote it with the edg of the sword, and
al the soul that were therein he utterli destroy that day,
accord to all that he had done to lachish.

10:36 and joshua went up from eglon, and all israel with him, unto
hebron; and they fought against it: 10:37 and they took it, and smote
it with the edg of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the
citi thereof, and all the soul that were therein; he left none
remaining, accord to all that he had done to eglon; but destroyed
it utterly, and all the soul that were therein.

10:38 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, to debir; and
fought against it: 10:39 and he took it, and the king thereof, and all
th citi thereof; and they smote them with the edg of the sword,
and utterli destroy all the soul that were therein; he left none
remaining: as he had done to hebron, so he did to debir, and to the
k thereof; as he had done also to libnah, and to her king.

10:40 So joshua smote all the countri of the hills, and of the south,
and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
remaining, but utterli destroy all that breathed, as the lord god of
israel commanded.

10:41 and joshua smote them from kadeshbarnea even unto gaza, and all
th countri of goshen, even unto gibeon.

10:42 and all these king and their land did joshua take at one time,
becaus the lord god of israel fought for israel.

10:43 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

11:1 and it came to pass, when jabin king of hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to jobab king of madon, and to the king of
shimron, and to the king of achshaph, 11:2 and to the king that were
on the north of the mountains, and of the plain south of chinneroth,
and in the valley, and in the border of dor on the west, 11:3 and to
th canaanit on the east and on the west, and to the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, and the jebusit in the mountains, and to
th hivit under hermon in the land of mizpeh.

11:4 and they went out, they and all their host with them, much
people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with
hors and chariot veri many.

11:5 and when all these king were met together, they came and pitched
togeth at the water of merom, to fight against israel.

11:6 and the lord said unto joshua, Be not afraid becaus of them: for
to morrow about thi time will I deliv them up all slain before
israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariot with
fire.

11:7 So joshua came, and all the peopl of war with him, against them
bi the water of merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.

11:8 and the lord deliv them into the hand of israel, who smote
them, and chase them unto great zidon, and unto misrephothmaim, and
unto the valley of mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they
left them none remaining.

11:9 and joshua did unto them as the lord bade him: he hough their
horses, and burnt their chariot with fire.

11:10 and joshua at that time turn back, and took hazor, and smote
th king thereof with the sword: for hazor beforetim wa the head of
al those kingdoms.

11:11 and they smote all the soul that were therein with the edg of
th sword, utterli destroy them: there wa not ani left to breathe:
and he burnt hazor with fire.

11:12 and all the citi of those kings, and all the king of them,
did joshua take, and smote them with the edg of the sword, and he
utterli destroy them, as mose the servant of the lord commanded.

11:13 but as for the citi that stood still in their strength, israel
burn none of them, save hazor only; that did joshua burn.

11:14 and all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children
of israel took for a prey unto themselves; but everi man they smote
with the edg of the sword, until they had destroy them, neither
left they ani to breathe.

11:15 As the lord command mose hi servant, so did mose command
joshua, and so did joshua; he left noth undon of all that the lord
command moses.

11:16 So joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south
country, and all the land of goshen, and the valley, and the plain,
and the mountain of israel, and the valley of the same; 11:17 even
from the mount halak, that goeth up to seir, even unto baalgad in the
valley of lebanon under mount hermon: and all their king he took, and
smot them, and slew them.

11:18 joshua made war a long time with all those kings.

11:19 there wa not a citi that made peac with the children of
israel, save the hivit the inhabit of gibeon: all other they
took in battle.

11:20 for it wa of the lord to harden their hearts, that they should
com against israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the
lord command moses.

11:21 and at that time came joshua, and cut off the anakim from the
mountains, from hebron, from debir, from anab, and from all the
mountain of judah, and from all the mountain of israel: joshua
destroy them utterli with their cities.

11:22 there wa none of the anakim left in the land of the children
of israel: onli in gaza, in gath, and in ashdod, there remained.

11:23 So joshua took the whole land, accord to all that the lord
said unto moses; and joshua gave it for an inherit unto israel
accord to their divis by their tribes. and the land rest from
war.

12:1 now these are the king of the land, which the children of israel
smote, and possess their land on the other side jordan toward the
ris of the sun, from the river arnon unto mount hermon, and all the
plain on the east: 12:2 sihon king of the amorites, who dwelt in
heshbon, and rule from aroer, which is upon the bank of the river
arnon, and from the middl of the river, and from half gilead, even
unto the river jabbok, which is the border of the children of ammon;
12:3 and from the plain to the sea of chinneroth on the east, and unto
th sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to
bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under ashdothpisgah: 12:4 and the
coast of Og king of bashan, which wa of the remnant of the giants,
that dwelt at ashtaroth and at edrei, 12:5 and reign in mount
hermon, and in salcah, and in all bashan, unto the border of the
geshurit and the maachathites, and half gilead, the border of sihon
k of heshbon.

12:6 them did mose the servant of the lord and the children of israel
smite: and mose the servant of the lord gave it for a possess unto
th reubenites, and the gadites, and the half tribe of manasseh.

12:7 and these are the king of the countri which joshua and the
children of israel smote on thi side jordan on the west, from baalgad
in the valley of lebanon even unto the mount halak, that goeth up to
seir; which joshua gave unto the tribe of israel for a possession
accord to their divisions; 12:8 In the mountains, and in the
valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness,
and in the south country; the hittites, the amorites, and the
canaanites, the perizzites, the hivites, and the jebusites: 12:9 the
k of jericho, one; the king of ai, which is besid bethel, one;
12:10 the king of jerusalem, one; the king of hebron, one; 12:11 the
k of jarmuth, one; the king of lachish, one; 12:12 the king of
eglon, one; the king of gezer, one; 12:13 the king of debir, one; the
k of geder, one; 12:14 the king of hormah, one; the king of arad,
one; 12:15 the king of libnah, one; the king of adullam, one; 12:16
the king of makkedah, one; the king of bethel, one; 12:17 the king of
tappuah, one; the king of hepher, one; 12:18 the king of aphek, one;
th king of lasharon, one; 12:19 the king of madon, one; the king of
hazor, one; 12:20 the king of shimronmeron, one; the king of achshaph,
one; 12:21 the king of taanach, one; the king of megiddo, one; 12:22
the king of kedesh, one; the king of jokneam of carmel, one; 12:23 the
k of dor in the coast of dor, one; the king of the nation of
gilgal, one; 12:24 the king of tirzah, one: all the king thirti and
one.

13:1 now joshua wa old and stricken in years; and the lord said unto
him, thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very
much land to be possessed.

13:2 thi is the land that yet remaineth: all the border of the
philistines, and all geshuri, 13:3 from sihor, which is befor egypt,
even unto the border of ekron northward, which is count to the
canaanite: five lord of the philistines; the gazathites, and the
ashdothites, the eshkalonites, the gittites, and the ekronites; also
th avites: 13:4 from the south, all the land of the canaanites, and
mearah that is besid the sidonian unto aphek, to the border of the
amorites: 13:5 and the land of the giblites, and all lebanon, toward
th sunrising, from baalgad under mount hermon unto the enter into
hamath.

13:6 all the inhabit of the hill countri from lebanon unto
misrephothmaim, and all the sidonians, them will I drive out from
befor the children of israel: onli divid thou it by lot unto the
israelit for an inheritance, as I have command thee.

13:7 now therefor divid thi land for an inherit unto the nine
tribes, and the half tribe of manasseh, 13:8 with whom the reubenites
and the gadit have receiv their inheritance, which mose gave
them, beyond jordan eastward, even as mose the servant of the lord
gav them; 13:9 from aroer, that is upon the bank of the river arnon,
and the citi that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of
medeba unto dibon; 13:10 and all the citi of sihon king of the
amorites, which reign in heshbon, unto the border of the children of
ammon; 13:11 and gilead, and the border of the geshurit and
maachathites, and all mount hermon, and all bashan unto salcah; 13:12
all the kingdom of Og in bashan, which reign in ashtaroth and in
edrei, who remain of the remnant of the giants: for these did moses
smite, and cast them out.

13:13 nevertheless the children of israel expel not the geshurites,
nor the maachathites: but the geshurit and the maachathit dwell
among the israelit until thi day.

13:14 onli unto the tribe of levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrific of the lord god of israel made by fire are their
inheritance, as he said unto them.

13:15 and mose gave unto the tribe of the children of reuben
inherit accord to their families.

13:16 and their coast wa from aroer, that is on the bank of the river
arnon, and the citi that is in the midst of the river, and all the
plain by medeba; 13:17 heshbon, and all her citi that are in the
plain; dibon, and bamothbaal, and bethbaalmeon, 13:18 and jahaza, and
kedemoth, and mephaath, 13:19 and kirjathaim, and sibmah, and
zarethshahar in the mount of the valley, 13:20 and bethpeor, and
ashdothpisgah, and bethjeshimoth, 13:21 and all the citi of the
plain, and all the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, which
reign in heshbon, whom mose smote with the princ of midian, evi,
and rekem, and zur, and hur, and reba, which were duke of sihon,
dwel in the country.

13:22 balaam also the son of beor, the soothsayer, did the children of
israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.

13:23 and the border of the children of reuben wa jordan, and the
bord thereof. thi wa the inherit of the children of reuben
aft their families, the citi and the villag thereof.

13:24 and mose gave inherit unto the tribe of gad, even unto the
children of gad accord to their families.

13:25 and their coast wa jazer, and all the citi of gilead, and
half the land of the children of ammon, unto aroer that is before
rabbah; 13:26 and from heshbon unto ramathmizpeh, and betonim; and
from mahanaim unto the border of debir; 13:27 and in the valley,
betharam, and bethnimrah, and succoth, and zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of sihon king of heshbon, jordan and hi border, even unto the
edg of the sea of chinnereth on the other side jordan eastward.

13:28 thi is the inherit of the children of gad after their
families, the cities, and their villages.

13:29 and mose gave inherit unto the half tribe of manasseh: and
thi wa the possess of the half tribe of the children of manasseh
bi their families.

13:30 and their coast wa from mahanaim, all bashan, all the kingdom
of Og king of bashan, and all the town of jair, which are in bashan,
threescor cities: 13:31 and half gilead, and ashtaroth, and edrei,
c of the kingdom of Og in bashan, were pertain unto the
children of machir the son of manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of machir by their families.

13:32 these are the countri which mose did distribut for
inherit in the plain of moab, on the other side jordan, by
jericho, eastward.

13:33 but unto the tribe of levi mose gave not ani inheritance: the
lord god of israel wa their inheritance, as he said unto them.

14:1 and these are the countri which the children of israel
inherit in the land of canaan, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
th son of nun, and the head of the father of the tribe of the
children of israel, distribut for inherit to them.

14:2 By lot wa their inheritance, as the lord command by the hand
of moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 for mose had given the inherit of two tribe and an half
trib on the other side jordan: but unto the levit he gave none
inherit among them.

14:4 for the children of joseph were two tribes, manasseh and ephraim:
therefor they gave no part unto the levit in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburb for their cattl and for their
substance.

14:5 As the lord command moses, so the children of israel did, and
they divid the land.

14:6 then the children of judah came unto joshua in gilgal: and caleb
th son of jephunneh the kenezit said unto him, thou knowest the
th that the lord said unto mose the man of god concern me and
the in kadeshbarnea.

14:7 forti year old wa I when mose the servant of the lord sent me
from kadeshbarnea to espi out the land; and I brought him word again
a it wa in mine heart.

14:8 nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of
th peopl melt: but I wholli follow the lord my god.

14:9 and mose sware on that day, saying, sure the land whereon thy
feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thi children' for
ever, becaus thou hast wholli follow the lord my god.

14:10 and now, behold, the lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these
forti and five years, even sinc the lord spake thi word unto moses,
whil the children of israel wander in the wilderness: and now, lo,
i am thi day fourscor and five year old.

14:11 As yet I am as strong thi day as I wa in the day that moses
s me: as my strength wa then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in.

14:12 now therefor give me thi mountain, whereof the lord spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the anakim were there,
and that the citi were great and fenced: if so be the lord will be
with me, then I shall be abl to drive them out, as the lord said.

14:13 and joshua bless him, and gave unto caleb the son of jephunneh
hebron for an inheritance.

14:14 hebron therefor becam the inherit of caleb the son of
jephunneh the kenezit unto thi day, becaus that he wholli followed
th lord god of israel.

14:15 and the name of hebron befor wa kirjatharba; which arba wa a
great man among the anakims. and the land had rest from war.

15:1 thi then wa the lot of the tribe of the children of judah by
their families; even to the border of edom the wilder of zin
southward wa the uttermost part of the south coast.

15:2 and their south border wa from the shore of the salt sea, from
th bay that looketh southward: 15:3 and it went out to the south side
to maalehacrabbim, and pass along to zin, and ascend up on the
south side unto kadeshbarnea, and pass along to hezron, and went up
to adar, and fetch a compass to karkaa: 15:4 from thenc it passed
toward azmon, and went out unto the river of egypt; and the go out
of that coast were at the sea: thi shall be your south coast.

15:5 and the east border wa the salt sea, even unto the end of
jordan.

and their border in the north quarter wa from the bay of the sea at
th uttermost part of jordan: 15:6 and the border went up to
bethhogla, and pass along by the north of betharabah; and the border
w up to the stone of bohan the son of reuben: 15:7 and the border
w up toward debir from the valley of achor, and so northward,
look toward gilgal, that is befor the go up to adummim, which
i on the south side of the river: and the border pass toward the
wat of enshemesh, and the go out thereof were at enrogel: 15:8
and the border went up by the valley of the son of hinnom unto the
south side of the jebusite; the same is jerusalem: and the border went
up to the top of the mountain that lieth befor the valley of hinnom
westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giant northward:
15:9 and the border wa drawn from the top of the hill unto the
fountain of the water of nephtoah, and went out to the citi of mount
ephron; and the border wa drawn to baalah, which is kirjathjearim:
15:10 and the border compass from baalah westward unto mount seir,
and pass along unto the side of mount jearim, which is chesalon, on
th north side, and went down to bethshemesh, and pass on to timnah:
15:11 and the border went out unto the side of ekron northward: and
th border wa drawn to shicron, and pass along to mount baalah, and
went out unto jabneel; and the go out of the border were at the
sea.

15:12 and the west border wa to the great sea, and the coast thereof.

thi is the coast of the children of judah round about accord to
their families.

15:13 and unto caleb the son of jephunneh he gave a part among the
children of judah, accord to the command of the lord to joshua,
even the citi of arba the father of anak, which citi is hebron.

15:14 and caleb drove thenc the three son of anak, sheshai, and
ahiman, and talmai, the children of anak.

15:15 and he went up thenc to the inhabit of debir: and the name
of debir befor wa kirjathsepher.

15:16 and caleb said, He that smiteth kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to
him will I give achsah my daughter to wife.

15:17 and othniel the son of kenaz, the brother of caleb, took it: and
h gave him achsah hi daughter to wife.

15:18 and it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she move him to
ask of her father a field: and she light off her ass; and caleb said
unto her, what wouldest thou?  15:19 who answered, give me a blessing;
for thou hast given me a south land; give me also spring of water.
and he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.

15:20 thi is the inherit of the tribe of the children of judah
accord to their families.

15:21 and the uttermost citi of the tribe of the children of judah
toward the coast of edom southward were kabzeel, and eder, and jagur,
15:22 and kinah, and dimonah, and adadah, 15:23 and kedesh, and hazor,
and ithnan, 15:24 ziph, and telem, and bealoth, 15:25 and hazor,
hadattah, and kerioth, and hezron, which is hazor, 15:26 amam, and
shema, and moladah, 15:27 and hazargaddah, and heshmon, and bethpalet,
15:28 and hazarshual, and beersheba, and bizjothjah, 15:29 baalah, and
iim, and azem, 15:30 and eltolad, and chesil, and hormah, 15:31 and
ziklag, and madmannah, and sansannah, 15:32 and lebaoth, and shilhim,
and ain, and rimmon: all the citi are twenti and nine, with their
villages: 15:33 and in the valley, eshtaol, and zoreah, and ashnah,
15:34 and zanoah, and engannim, tappuah, and enam, 15:35 jarmuth, and
adullam, socoh, and azekah, 15:36 and sharaim, and adithaim, and
gederah, and gederothaim; fourteen citi with their villages: 15:37
zenan, and hadashah, and migdalgad, 15:38 and dilean, and mizpeh, and
joktheel, 15:39 lachish, and bozkath, and eglon, 15:40 and cabbon, and
lahmam, and kithlish, 15:41 and gederoth, bethdagon, and naamah, and
makkedah; sixteen citi with their villages: 15:42 libnah, and ether,
and ashan, 15:43 and jiphtah, and ashnah, and nezib, 15:44 and keilah,
and achzib, and mareshah; nine citi with their villages: 15:45
ekron, with her town and her villages: 15:46 from ekron even unto the
sea, all that lay near ashdod, with their villages: 15:47 ashdod with
her town and her villages, gaza with her town and her villages, unto
th river of egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof: 15:48
and in the mountains, shamir, and jattir, and socoh, 15:49 and dannah,
and kirjathsannah, which is debir, 15:50 and anab, and eshtemoh, and
anim, 15:51 and goshen, and holon, and giloh; eleven citi with their
villages: 15:52 arab, and dumah, and eshean, 15:53 and janum, and
bethtappuah, and aphekah, 15:54 and humtah, and kirjatharba, which is
hebron, and zior; nine citi with their villages: 15:55 maon, carmel,
and ziph, and juttah, 15:56 and jezreel, and jokdeam, and zanoah,
15:57 cain, gibeah, and timnah; ten citi with their villages: 15:58
halhul, bethzur, and gedor, 15:59 and maarath, and bethanoth, and
eltekon; six citi with their villages: 15:60 kirjathbaal, which is
kirjathjearim, and rabbah; two citi with their villages: 15:61 in
th wilderness, betharabah, middin, and secacah, 15:62 and nibshan,
and the citi of salt, and engedi; six citi with their villages.

15:63 As for the jebusit the inhabit of jerusalem, the children
of judah could not drive them out; but the jebusit dwell with the
children of judah at jerusalem unto thi day.

16:1 and the lot of the children of joseph fell from jordan by
jericho, unto the water of jericho on the east, to the wilder that
goeth up from jericho throughout mount bethel, 16:2 and goeth out from
bethel to luz, and passeth along unto the border of archi to ataroth,
16:3 and goeth down westward to the coast of japhleti, unto the coast
of bethhoron the nether, and to gezer; and the go out thereof are
at the sea.

16:4 So the children of joseph, manasseh and ephraim, took their
inheritance.

16:5 and the border of the children of ephraim accord to their
famili wa thus: even the border of their inherit on the east
sid wa atarothaddar, unto bethhoron the upper; 16:6 and the border
w out toward the sea to michmethah on the north side; and the
bord went about eastward unto taanathshiloh, and pass by it on the
east to janohah; 16:7 and it went down from janohah to ataroth, and to
naarath, and came to jericho, and went out at jordan.

16:8 the border went out from tappuah westward unto the river kanah;
and the go out thereof were at the sea. thi is the inherit of
th tribe of the children of ephraim by their families.

16:9 and the separ citi for the children of ephraim were among
th inherit of the children of manasseh, all the citi with their
villages.

16:10 and they drave not out the canaanit that dwelt in gezer: but
th canaanit dwell among the ephraimit unto thi day, and serve
und tribute.

17:1 there wa also a lot for the tribe of manasseh; for he wa the
firstborn of joseph; to wit, for machir the firstborn of manasseh, the
fath of gilead: becaus he wa a man of war, therefor he had gilead
and bashan.

17:2 there wa also a lot for the rest of the children of manasseh by
their families; for the children of abiezer, and for the children of
helek, and for the children of asriel, and for the children of
shechem, and for the children of hepher, and for the children of
shemida: these were the male children of manasseh the son of joseph by
their families.

17:3 but zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son of gilead, the son of
machir, the son of manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
th name of hi daughters, mahlah, and noah, hoglah, milcah, and
tirzah.

17:4 and they came near befor eleazar the priest, and befor joshua
th son of nun, and befor the princes, saying, the lord commanded
mos to give us an inherit among our brethren. therefore
accord to the command of the lord he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.

17:5 and there fell ten portion to manasseh, besid the land of
gilead and bashan, which were on the other side jordan; 17:6 because
th daughter of manasseh had an inherit among hi sons: and the
rest of manasseh' son had the land of gilead.

17:7 and the coast of manasseh wa from asher to michmethah, that
lieth befor shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto
th inhabit of entappuah.

17:8 now manasseh had the land of tappuah: but tappuah on the border
of manasseh belong to the children of ephraim; 17:9 and the coast
descend unto the river kanah, southward of the river: these cities
of ephraim are among the citi of manasseh: the coast of manasseh
also wa on the north side of the river, and the outgo of it were
at the sea: 17:10 southward it wa ephraim's, and northward it was
manasseh's, and the sea is hi border; and they met togeth in asher
on the north, and in issachar on the east.

17:11 and manasseh had in issachar and in asher bethshean and her
towns, and ibleam and her towns, and the inhabit of dor and her
towns, and the inhabit of endor and her towns, and the inhabitants
of taanach and her towns, and the inhabit of megiddo and her
towns, even three countries.

17:12 yet the children of manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants
of those cities; but the canaanit would dwell in that land.

17:13 yet it came to pass, when the children of israel were waxen
strong, that they put the canaanit to tribute, but did not utterly
dr them out.

17:14 and the children of joseph spake unto joshua, saying, whi hast
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, see I am a
great people, forasmuch as the lord hath bless me hitherto?  17:15
and joshua answer them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up
to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the
perizzit and of the giants, if mount ephraim be too narrow for thee.

17:16 and the children of joseph said, the hill is not enough for us:
and all the canaanit that dwell in the land of the valley have
chariot of iron, both they who are of bethshean and her towns, and
they who are of the valley of jezreel.

17:17 and joshua spake unto the hous of joseph, even to ephraim and
to manasseh, saying, thou art a great people, and hast great power:
th shalt not have one lot only: 17:18 but the mountain shall be
thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings
of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

18:1 and the whole congreg of the children of israel assembled
togeth at shiloh, and set up the tabernacl of the congregation
there. and the land wa subdu befor them.

18:2 and there remain among the children of israel seven tribes,
which had not yet receiv their inheritance.

18:3 and joshua said unto the children of israel, how long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the lord god of your fathers
hath given you?  18:4 give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describ it accord to the inherit of them; and they
shal come again to me.

18:5 and they shall divid it into seven parts: judah shall abid in
their coast on the south, and the hous of joseph shall abid in their
coast on the north.

18:6 Ye shall therefor describ the land into seven parts, and bring
th descript hither to me, that I may cast lot for you here before
th lord our god.

18:7 but the levit have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
lord is their inheritance: and gad, and reuben, and half the tribe of
manasseh, have receiv their inherit beyond jordan on the east,
which mose the servant of the lord gave them.

18:8 and the men arose, and went away: and joshua charg them that
went to describ the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and
describ it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lot for you
befor the lord in shiloh.

18:9 and the men went and pass through the land, and describ it by
citi into seven part in a book, and came again to joshua to the
host at shiloh.

18:10 and joshua cast lot for them in shiloh befor the lord: and
ther joshua divid the land unto the children of israel accord to
their divisions.

18:11 and the lot of the tribe of the children of benjamin came up
accord to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth
between the children of judah and the children of joseph.

18:12 and their border on the north side wa from jordan; and the
bord went up to the side of jericho on the north side, and went up
through the mountain westward; and the go out thereof were at the
wild of bethaven.

18:13 and the border went over from thenc toward luz, to the side of
luz, which is bethel, southward; and the border descend to
atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether
bethhoron.

18:14 and the border wa drawn thence, and compass the corner of the
sea southward, from the hill that lieth befor bethhoron southward;
and the go out thereof were at kirjathbaal, which is
kirjathjearim, a citi of the children of judah: thi wa the west
quarter.

18:15 and the south quarter wa from the end of kirjathjearim, and the
bord went out on the west, and went out to the well of water of
nephtoah: 18:16 and the border came down to the end of the mountain
that lieth befor the valley of the son of hinnom, and which is in the
valley of the giant on the north, and descend to the valley of
hinnom, to the side of jebusi on the south, and descend to enrogel,
18:17 and wa drawn from the north, and went forth to enshemesh, and
went forth toward geliloth, which is over against the go up of
adummim, and descend to the stone of bohan the son of reuben, 18:18
and pass along toward the side over against arabah northward, and
went down unto arabah: 18:19 and the border pass along to the side
of bethhoglah northward: and the outgo of the border were at the
north bay of the salt sea at the south end of jordan: thi wa the
south coast.

18:20 and jordan wa the border of it on the east side. thi wa the
inherit of the children of benjamin, by the coast thereof round
about, accord to their families.

18:21 now the citi of the tribe of the children of benjamin
accord to their famili were jericho, and bethhoglah, and the
valley of keziz, 18:22 and betharabah, and zemaraim, and bethel, 18:23
and avim, and pharah, and ophrah, 18:24 and chepharhaammonai, and
ophni, and gaba; twelv citi with their villages: 18:25 gibeon, and
ramah, and beeroth, 18:26 and mizpeh, and chephirah, and mozah, 18:27
and rekem, and irpeel, and taralah, 18:28 and zelah, eleph, and
jebusi, which is jerusalem, gibeath, and kirjath; fourteen citi with
their villages. thi is the inherit of the children of benjamin
accord to their families.

19:1 and the second lot came forth to simeon, even for the tribe of
th children of simeon accord to their families: and their
inherit wa within the inherit of the children of judah.

19:2 and they had in their inherit beersheba, and sheba, and
moladah, 19:3 and hazarshual, and balah, and azem, 19:4 and eltolad,
and bethul, and hormah, 19:5 and ziklag, and bethmarcaboth, and
hazarsusah, 19:6 and bethlebaoth, and sharuhen; thirteen citi and
their villages: 19:7 ain, remmon, and ether, and ashan; four cities
and their villages: 19:8 and all the villag that were round about
thes citi to baalathbeer, ramath of the south. thi is the
inherit of the tribe of the children of simeon accord to their
families.

19:9 out of the portion of the children of judah wa the inheritance
of the children of simeon: for the part of the children of judah was
too much for them: therefor the children of simeon had their
inherit within the inherit of them.

19:10 and the third lot came up for the children of zebulun according
to their families: and the border of their inherit wa unto sarid:
19:11 and their border went up toward the sea, and maralah, and
reach to dabbasheth, and reach to the river that is before
jokneam; 19:12 and turn from sarid eastward toward the sunrising
unto the border of chislothtabor, and then goeth out to daberath, and
goeth up to japhia, 19:13 and from thenc passeth on along on the east
to gittahhepher, to ittahkazin, and goeth out to remmonmethoar to
neah; 19:14 and the border compasseth it on the north side to
hannathon: and the outgo thereof are in the valley of jiphthahel:
19:15 and kattath, and nahallal, and shimron, and idalah, and
bethlehem: twelv citi with their villages.

19:16 thi is the inherit of the children of zebulun accord to
their families, these citi with their villages.

19:17 and the fourth lot came out to issachar, for the children of
issachar accord to their families.

19:18 and their border wa toward jezreel, and chesulloth, and shunem,
19:19 and haphraim, and shihon, and anaharath, 19:20 and rabbith, and
kishion, and abez, 19:21 and remeth, and engannim, and enhaddah, and
bethpazzez; 19:22 and the coast reacheth to tabor, and shahazimah, and
bethshemesh; and the outgo of their border were at jordan: sixteen
c with their villages.

19:23 thi is the inherit of the tribe of the children of issachar
accord to their families, the citi and their villages.

19:24 and the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of
ash accord to their families.

19:25 and their border wa helkath, and hali, and beten, and achshaph,
19:26 and alammelech, and amad, and misheal; and reacheth to carmel
westward, and to shihorlibnath; 19:27 and turneth toward the sunrising
to bethdagon, and reacheth to zebulun, and to the valley of jiphthahel
toward the north side of bethemek, and neiel, and goeth out to cabul
on the left hand, 19:28 and hebron, and rehob, and hammon, and kanah,
even unto great zidon; 19:29 and then the coast turneth to ramah, and
to the strong citi tyre; and the coast turneth to hosah; and the
outgo thereof are at the sea from the coast to achzib: 19:30 ummah
also, and aphek, and rehob: twenti and two citi with their villages.

19:31 thi is the inherit of the tribe of the children of asher
accord to their families, these citi with their villages.

19:32 the sixth lot came out to the children of naphtali, even for the
children of naphtali accord to their families.

19:33 and their coast wa from heleph, from allon to zaanannim, and
adami, nekeb, and jabneel, unto lakum; and the outgo thereof were
at jordan: 19:34 and then the coast turneth westward to aznothtabor,
and goeth out from thenc to hukkok, and reacheth to zebulun on the
south side, and reacheth to asher on the west side, and to judah upon
jordan toward the sunrising.

19:35 and the fenc citi are ziddim, zer, and hammath, rakkath, and
chinnereth, 19:36 and adamah, and ramah, and hazor, 19:37 and kedesh,
and edrei, and enhazor, 19:38 and iron, and migdalel, horem, and
bethanath, and bethshemesh; nineteen citi with their villages.

19:39 thi is the inherit of the tribe of the children of naphtali
accord to their families, the citi and their villages.

19:40 and the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of
dan accord to their families.

19:41 and the coast of their inherit wa zorah, and eshtaol, and
irshemesh, 19:42 and shaalabbin, and ajalon, and jethlah, 19:43 and
elon, and thimnathah, and ekron, 19:44 and eltekeh, and gibbethon, and
baalath, 19:45 and jehud, and beneberak, and gathrimmon, 19:46 and
mejarkon, and rakkon, with the border befor japho.

19:47 and the coast of the children of dan went out too littl for
them: therefor the children of dan went up to fight against leshem,
and took it, and smote it with the edg of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and call leshem, dan, after the name of dan
their father.

19:48 thi is the inherit of the tribe of the children of dan
accord to their families, these citi with their villages.

19:49 when they had made an end of divid the land for inheritance
bi their coasts, the children of israel gave an inherit to joshua
th son of nun among them: 19:50 accord to the word of the lord
they gave him the citi which he asked, even timnathserah in mount
ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

19:51 these are the inheritances, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
th son of nun, and the head of the father of the tribe of the
children of israel, divid for an inherit by lot in shiloh before
th lord, at the door of the tabernacl of the congregation. So they
mad an end of divid the country.

20:1 the lord also spake unto joshua, saying, 20:2 speak to the
children of israel, saying, appoint out for you citi of refuge,
whereof I spake unto you by the hand of moses: 20:3 that the slayer
that killeth ani person unawar and unwittingli may flee thither: and
they shall be your refug from the aveng of blood.

20:4 and when he that doth flee unto one of those citi shall stand
at the enter of the gate of the city, and shall declar hi cause
in the ear of the elder of that city, they shall take him into the
citi unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.

20:5 and if the aveng of blood pursu after him, then they shall not
deliv the slayer up into hi hand; becaus he smote hi neighbour
unwittingly, and hate him not beforetime.

20:6 and he shall dwell in that city, until he stand befor the
congreg for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that
shal be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto
hi own city, and unto hi own house, unto the citi from whenc he
fled.

20:7 and they appoint kedesh in galile in mount naphtali, and
shechem in mount ephraim, and kirjatharba, which is hebron, in the
mountain of judah.

20:8 and on the other side jordan by jericho eastward, they assigned
bez in the wilder upon the plain out of the tribe of reuben, and
ramoth in gilead out of the tribe of gad, and golan in bashan out of
th tribe of manasseh.

20:9 these were the citi appoint for all the children of israel,
and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever
killeth ani person at unawar might flee thither, and not die by the
hand of the aveng of blood, until he stood befor the congregation.

21:1 then came near the head of the father of the levit unto
eleazar the priest, and unto joshua the son of nun, and unto the heads
of the father of the tribe of the children of israel; 21:2 and they
spak unto them at shiloh in the land of canaan, saying, the lord
command by the hand of mose to give us citi to dwell in, with the
suburb thereof for our cattle.

21:3 and the children of israel gave unto the levit out of their
inheritance, at the command of the lord, these citi and their
suburbs.

21:4 and the lot came out for the famili of the kohathites: and the
children of aaron the priest, which were of the levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of judah, and out of the tribe of simeon, and out of
th tribe of benjamin, thirteen cities.

21:5 and the rest of the children of kohath had by lot out of the
famili of the tribe of ephraim, and out of the tribe of dan, and out
of the half tribe of manasseh, ten cities.

21:6 and the children of gershon had by lot out of the famili of the
trib of issachar, and out of the tribe of asher, and out of the tribe
of naphtali, and out of the half tribe of manasseh in bashan, thirteen
cities.

21:7 the children of merari by their famili had out of the tribe of
reuben, and out of the tribe of gad, and out of the tribe of zebulun,
twelv cities.

21:8 and the children of israel gave by lot unto the levit these
c with their suburbs, as the lord command by the hand of moses.

21:9 and they gave out of the tribe of the children of judah, and out
of the tribe of the children of simeon, these citi which are here
ment by name.

21:10 which the children of aaron, be of the famili of the
kohathites, who were of the children of levi, had: for their wa the
first lot.

21:11 and they gave them the citi of arba the father of anak, which
citi is hebron, in the hill countri of judah, with the suburb thereof
round about it.

21:12 but the field of the city, and the villag thereof, gave they
to caleb the son of jephunneh for hi possession.

21:13 thu they gave to the children of aaron the priest hebron with
her suburbs, to be a citi of refug for the slayer; and libnah with
her suburbs, 21:14 and jattir with her suburbs, and eshtemoa with her
suburbs, 21:15 and holon with her suburbs, and debir with her suburbs,
21:16 and ain with her suburbs, and juttah with her suburbs, and
bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine citi out of those two tribes.

21:17 and out of the tribe of benjamin, gibeon with her suburbs, geba
with her suburbs, 21:18 anathoth with her suburbs, and almon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:19 all the citi of the children of aaron, the priests, were
thirteen citi with their suburbs.

21:20 and the famili of the children of kohath, the levit which
remain of the children of kohath, even they had the citi of their
lot out of the tribe of ephraim.

21:21 for they gave them shechem with her suburb in mount ephraim, to
b a citi of refug for the slayer; and gezer with her suburbs, 21:22
and kibzaim with her suburbs, and bethhoron with her suburbs; four
cities.

21:23 and out of the tribe of dan, eltekeh with her suburbs, gibbethon
with her suburbs, 21:24 aijalon with her suburbs, gathrimmon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:25 and out of the half tribe of manasseh, tanach with her suburbs,
and gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.

21:26 all the citi were ten with their suburb for the famili of
th children of kohath that remained.

21:27 and unto the children of gershon, of the famili of the
levites, out of the other half tribe of manasseh they gave golan in
bashan with her suburbs, to be a citi of refug for the slayer; and
beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.

21:28 and out of the tribe of issachar, kishon with her suburbs,
dabareh with her suburbs, 21:29 jarmuth with her suburbs, engannim
with her suburbs; four cities.

21:30 and out of the tribe of asher, mishal with her suburbs, abdon
with her suburbs, 21:31 helkath with her suburbs, and rehob with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:32 and out of the tribe of naphtali, kedesh in galile with her
suburbs, to be a citi of refug for the slayer; and hammothdor with
her suburbs, and kartan with her suburbs; three cities.

21:33 all the citi of the gershonit accord to their families
wer thirteen citi with their suburbs.

21:34 and unto the famili of the children of merari, the rest of the
levites, out of the tribe of zebulun, jokneam with her suburbs, and
kartah with her suburbs, 21:35 dimnah with her suburbs, nahal with
her suburbs; four cities.

21:36 and out of the tribe of reuben, bezer with her suburbs, and
jahazah with her suburbs, 21:37 kedemoth with her suburbs, and
mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.

21:38 and out of the tribe of gad, ramoth in gilead with her suburbs,
to be a citi of refug for the slayer; and mahanaim with her suburbs,
21:39 heshbon with her suburbs, jazer with her suburbs; four citi in
all.

21:40 So all the citi for the children of merari by their families,
which were remain of the famili of the levites, were by their lot
twelv cities.

21:41 all the citi of the levit within the possess of the
children of israel were forti and eight citi with their suburbs.

21:42 these citi were everi one with their suburb round about them:
thu were all these cities.

21:43 and the lord gave unto israel all the land which he sware to
giv unto their fathers; and they possess it, and dwelt therein.

21:44 and the lord gave them rest round about, accord to all that
h sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
enemi befor them; the lord deliv all their enemi into their
hand.

21:45 there fail not ought of ani good thing which the lord had
spoken unto the hous of israel; all came to pass.

22:1 then joshua call the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
trib of manasseh, 22:2 and said unto them, Ye have kept all that
mos the servant of the lord command you, and have obey my voice
in all that I command you: 22:3 Ye have not left your brethren these
mani day unto thi day, but have kept the charg of the commandment
of the lord your god.

22:4 and now the lord your god hath given rest unto your brethren, as
h promis them: therefor now return ye, and get you unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession, which mose the servant
of the lord gave you on the other side jordan.

22:5 but take dilig heed to do the command and the law, which
mos the servant of the lord charg you, to love the lord your god,
and to walk in all hi ways, and to keep hi commandments, and to
cleav unto him, and to serv him with all your heart and with all
your soul.

22:6 So joshua bless them, and sent them away: and they went unto
their tents.

22:7 now to the one half of the tribe of manasseh mose had given
possess in bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave joshua
among their brethren on thi side jordan westward. and when joshua
s them away also unto their tents, then he bless them, 22:8 and
h spake unto them, saying, return with much rich unto your tents,
and with veri much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass,
and with iron, and with veri much raiment: divid the spoil of your
enemi with your brethren.

22:9 and the children of reuben and the children of gad and the half
trib of manasseh returned, and depart from the children of israel
out of shiloh, which is in the land of canaan, to go unto the country
of gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were
possessed, accord to the word of the lord by the hand of moses.

22:10 and when they came unto the border of jordan, that are in the
land of canaan, the children of reuben and the children of gad and the
half tribe of manasseh built there an altar by jordan, a great altar
to see to.

22:11 and the children of israel heard say, behold, the children of
reuben and the children of gad and the half tribe of manasseh have
built an altar over against the land of canaan, in the border of
jordan, at the passag of the children of israel.

22:12 and when the children of israel heard of it, the whole
congreg of the children of israel gather themselv togeth at
shiloh, to go up to war against them.

22:13 and the children of israel sent unto the children of reuben, and
to the children of gad, and to the half tribe of manasseh, into the
land of gilead, phineha the son of eleazar the priest, 22:14 and with
him ten princes, of each chief hous a princ throughout all the
trib of israel; and each one wa an head of the hous of their
fath among the thousand of israel.

22:15 and they came unto the children of reuben, and to the children
of gad, and to the half tribe of manasseh, unto the land of gilead,
and they spake with them, saying, 22:16 thu saith the whole
congreg of the lord, what trespass is thi that ye have committed
against the god of israel, to turn away thi day from follow the
lord, in that ye have build you an altar, that ye might rebel this
day against the lord?  22:17 Is the iniqu of peor too littl for
us, from which we are not cleans until thi day, although there was
a plagu in the congreg of the lord, 22:18 but that ye must turn
away thi day from follow the lord? and it will be, see ye rebel
to day against the lord, that to morrow he will be wroth with the
whol congreg of israel.

22:19 notwithstanding, if the land of your possess be unclean, then
pass ye over unto the land of the possess of the lord, wherein the
lord' tabernacl dwelleth, and take possess among us: but rebel
not against the lord, nor rebel against us, in build you an altar
besid the altar of the lord our god.

22:20 did not achan the son of zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
thing, and wrath fell on all the congreg of israel? and that man
perish not alon in hi iniquity.

22:21 then the children of reuben and the children of gad and the half
trib of manasseh answered, and said unto the head of the thousands
of israel, 22:22 the lord god of gods, the lord god of gods, he
knoweth, and israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
transgress against the lord, (save us not thi day,) 22:23 that we
hav built us an altar to turn from follow the lord, or if to offer
thereon burnt offer or meat offering, or if to offer peace
off thereon, let the lord himself requir it; 22:24 and if we
hav not rather done it for fear of thi thing, saying, In time to
com your children might speak unto our children, saying, what have ye
to do with the lord god of israel?  22:25 for the lord hath made
jordan a border between us and you, ye children of reuben and children
of gad; ye have no part in the lord: so shall your children make our
children ceas from fear the lord.

22:26 therefor we said, let us now prepar to build us an altar, not
for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice: 22:27 but that it may be a
wit between us, and you, and our gener after us, that we
might do the servic of the lord befor him with our burnt offerings,
and with our sacrifices, and with our peac offerings; that your
children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part
in the lord.

22:28 therefor said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to
u or to our gener in time to come, that we may say again,
behold the pattern of the altar of the lord, which our father made,
not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness
between us and you.

22:29 god forbid that we should rebel against the lord, and turn this
day from follow the lord, to build an altar for burnt offerings,
for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, besid the altar of the lord
our god that is befor hi tabernacle.

22:30 and when phineha the priest, and the princ of the
congreg and head of the thousand of israel which were with him,
heard the word that the children of reuben and the children of gad
and the children of manasseh spake, it pleas them.

22:31 and phineha the son of eleazar the priest said unto the
children of reuben, and to the children of gad, and to the children of
manasseh, thi day we perceiv that the lord is among us, becaus ye
hav not commit thi trespass against the lord: now ye have
deliv the children of israel out of the hand of the lord.

22:32 and phineha the son of eleazar the priest, and the princes,
return from the children of reuben, and from the children of gad,
out of the land of gilead, unto the land of canaan, to the children of
israel, and brought them word again.

22:33 and the thing pleas the children of israel; and the children
of israel bless god, and did not intend to go up against them in
battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of reuben and gad
dwelt.

22:34 and the children of reuben and the children of gad call the
altar ed: for it shall be a wit between us that the lord is god.

23:1 and it came to pass a long time after that the lord had given
rest unto israel from all their enemi round about, that joshua waxed
old and stricken in age.

23:2 and joshua call for all israel, and for their elders, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said
unto them, I am old and stricken in age: 23:3 and ye have seen all
that the lord your god hath done unto all these nation becaus of
you; for the lord your god is he that hath fought for you.

23:4 behold, I have divid unto you by lot these nation that remain,
to be an inherit for your tribes, from jordan, with all the
nat that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.

23:5 and the lord your god, he shall expel them from befor you, and
driv them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as
th lord your god hath promis unto you.

23:6 Be ye therefor veri courag to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 23:7 that ye come not
among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor caus to swear by them, neither serve
them, nor bow yourselv unto them: 23:8 but cleav unto the lord your
god, as ye have done unto thi day.

23:9 for the lord hath driven out from befor you great nation and
strong: but as for you, no man hath been abl to stand befor you unto
thi day.

23:10 one man of you shall chase a thousand: for the lord your god, he
it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promis you.

23:11 take good heed therefor unto yourselves, that ye love the lord
your god.

23:12 els if ye do in ani wise go back, and cleav unto the remnant
of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
marriag with them, and go in unto them, and they to you: 23:13 know
for a certainti that the lord your god will no more drive out ani of
thes nation from befor you; but they shall be snare and trap unto
you, and scourg in your sides, and thorn in your eyes, until ye
perish from off thi good land which the lord your god hath given you.

23:14 and, behold, thi day I am go the way of all the earth: and
y know in all your heart and in all your souls, that not one thing
hath fail of all the good thing which the lord your god spake
concern you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath
fail thereof.

23:15 therefor it shall come to pass, that as all good thing are
com upon you, which the lord your god promis you; so shall the lord
br upon you all evil things, until he have destroy you from off
thi good land which the lord your god hath given you.

23:16 when ye have transgress the coven of the lord your god,
which he command you, and have gone and serv other gods, and bowed
yourselv to them; then shall the anger of the lord be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickli from off the good land which
h hath given unto you.

24:1 and joshua gather all the tribe of israel to shechem, and
cal for the elder of israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they present themselv before
god.

24:2 and joshua said unto all the people, thu saith the lord god of
israel, your father dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
serv other gods.

24:3 and I took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multipli his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and I gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and I gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and hi children went down into egypt.

24:5 I sent mose also and aaron, and I plagu egypt, accord to
that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.

24:6 and I brought your father out of egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the egyptian pursu after your father with chariot and
horsemen unto the red sea.

24:7 and when they cri unto the lord, he put dark between you
and the egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and cover them;
and your eye have seen what I have done in egypt: and ye dwelt in the
wild a long season.

24:8 and I brought you into the land of the amorites, which dwelt on
th other side jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into
your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroy them from
befor you.

24:9 then balak the son of zippor, king of moab, aros and warred
against israel, and sent and call balaam the son of beor to curse
you: 24:10 but I would not hearken unto balaam; therefor he blessed
y still: so I deliv you out of hi hand.

24:11 and you went over jordan, and came unto jericho: and the men of
jericho fought against you, the amorites, and the perizzites, and the
canaanites, and the hittites, and the girgashites, the hivites, and
th jebusites; and I deliv them into your hand.

24:12 and I sent the hornet befor you, which drave them out from
befor you, even the two king of the amorites; but not with thy
sword, nor with thi bow.

24:13 and I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and
citi which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyard and
oliveyard which ye plant not do ye eat.

24:14 now therefor fear the lord, and serv him in sincer and in
truth: and put away the god which your father serv on the other
sid of the flood, and in egypt; and serv ye the lord.

24:15 and if it seem evil unto you to serv the lord, choos you this
day whom ye will serve; whether the god which your father served
that were on the other side of the flood, or the god of the amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serv the
lord.

24:16 and the peopl answer and said, god forbid that we should
forsak the lord, to serv other gods; 24:17 for the lord our god, he
it is that brought us up and our father out of the land of egypt,
from the hous of bondage, and which did those great sign in our
sight, and preserv us in all the way wherein we went, and among all
th peopl through whom we passed: 24:18 and the lord drave out from
befor us all the people, even the amorit which dwelt in the land:
therefor will we also serv the lord; for he is our god.

24:19 and joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serv the lord: for
h is an holi god; he is a jealou god; he will not forgiv your
transgress nor your sins.

24:20 If ye forsak the lord, and serv strang gods, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consum you, after that he hath done you
good.

24:21 and the peopl said unto joshua, nay; but we will serv the
lord.

24:22 and joshua said unto the people, Ye are wit against
yourselv that ye have chosen you the lord, to serv him. and they
said, We are witnesses.

24:23 now therefor put away, said he, the strang god which are
among you, and inclin your heart unto the lord god of israel.

24:24 and the peopl said unto joshua, the lord our god will we serve,
and hi voic will we obey.

24:25 So joshua made a coven with the peopl that day, and set them
a statut and an ordin in shechem.

24:26 and joshua wrote these word in the book of the law of god, and
took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that wa by the
sanctuari of the lord.

24:27 and joshua said unto all the people, behold, thi stone shall be
a wit unto us; for it hath heard all the word of the lord which
h spake unto us: it shall be therefor a wit unto you, lest ye
deni your god.

24:28 So joshua let the peopl depart, everi man unto hi inheritance.

24:29 and it came to pass after these things, that joshua the son of
nun, the servant of the lord, died, be an hundr and ten years
old.

24:30 and they buri him in the border of hi inherit in
timnathserah, which is in mount ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of gaash.

24:31 and israel serv the lord all the day of joshua, and all the
day of the elder that overliv joshua, and which had known all the
work of the lord, that he had done for israel.

24:32 and the bone of joseph, which the children of israel brought up
out of egypt, buri they in shechem, in a parcel of ground which
jacob bought of the son of hamor the father of shechem for an hundred
piec of silver: and it becam the inherit of the children of
joseph.

24:33 and eleazar the son of aaron died; and they buri him in a hill
that pertain to phineha hi son, which wa given him in mount
ephraim.




th book of judges


1:1 now after the death of joshua it came to pass, that the children
of israel ask the lord, saying, who shall go up for us against the
canaanit first, to fight against them?  1:2 and the lord said, judah
shal go up: behold, I have deliv the land into hi hand.

1:3 and judah said unto simeon hi brother, come up with me into my
lot, that we may fight against the canaanites; and I likewis will go
with thee into thi lot. So simeon went with him.

1:4 and judah went up; and the lord deliv the canaanit and the
perizzit into their hand: and they slew of them in bezek ten
thousand men.

1:5 and they found adonibezek in bezek: and they fought against him,
and they slew the canaanit and the perizzites.

1:6 but adonibezek fled; and they pursu after him, and caught him,
and cut off hi thumb and hi great toes.

1:7 and adonibezek said, threescor and ten kings, have their thumbs
and their great toe cut off, gather their meat under my table: as i
hav done, so god hath requit me. and they brought him to jerusalem,
and there he died.

1:8 now the children of judah had fought against jerusalem, and had
taken it, and smitten it with the edg of the sword, and set the city
on fire.

1:9 and afterward the children of judah went down to fight against the
canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the
valley.

1:10 and judah went against the canaanit that dwelt in hebron: (now
th name of hebron befor wa kirjatharba:) and they slew sheshai, and
ahiman, and talmai.

1:11 and from thenc he went against the inhabit of debir: and the
nam of debir befor wa kirjathsepher: 1:12 and caleb said, He that
smiteth kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give achsah my
daught to wife.

1:13 and othniel the son of kenaz, caleb' younger brother, took it:
and he gave him achsah hi daughter to wife.

1:14 and it came to pass, when she came to him, that she move him to
ask of her father a field: and she light from off her ass; and caleb
said unto her, what wilt thou?  1:15 and she said unto him, give me a
blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also spring of
water. and caleb gave her the upper spring and the nether springs.

1:16 and the children of the kenite, moses' father in law, went up out
of the citi of palm tree with the children of judah into the
wild of judah, which lieth in the south of arad; and they went
and dwelt among the people.

1:17 and judah went with simeon hi brother, and they slew the
canaanit that inhabit zephath, and utterli destroy it. and the
nam of the citi wa call hormah.

1:18 also judah took gaza with the coast thereof, and askelon with the
coast thereof, and ekron with the coast thereof.

1:19 and the lord wa with judah; and he drave out the inhabit of
th mountain; but could not drive out the inhabit of the valley,
becaus they had chariot of iron.

1:20 and they gave hebron unto caleb, as mose said: and he expelled
th the three son of anak.

1:21 and the children of benjamin did not drive out the jebusit that
inhabit jerusalem; but the jebusit dwell with the children of
benjamin in jerusalem unto thi day.

1:22 and the hous of joseph, they also went up against bethel: and
th lord wa with them.

1:23 and the hous of joseph sent to descri bethel. (now the name of
th citi befor wa luz.)  1:24 and the spi saw a man come forth out
of the city, and they said unto him, shew us, we pray thee, the
entr into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.

1:25 and when he shew them the entranc into the city, they smote
th citi with the edg of the sword; but they let go the man and all
hi family.

1:26 and the man went into the land of the hittites, and built a city,
and call the name thereof luz: which is the name thereof unto this
day.

1:27 neither did manasseh drive out the inhabit of bethshean and
her towns, nor taanach and her towns, nor the inhabit of dor and
her towns, nor the inhabit of ibleam and her towns, nor the
inhabit of megiddo and her towns: but the canaanit would dwell
in that land.

1:28 and it came to pass, when israel wa strong, that they put the
canaanit to tribute, and did not utterli drive them out.

1:29 neither did ephraim drive out the canaanit that dwelt in gezer;
but the canaanit dwelt in gezer among them.

1:30 neither did zebulun drive out the inhabit of kitron, nor the
inhabit of nahalol; but the canaanit dwelt among them, and
becam tributaries.

1:31 neither did asher drive out the inhabit of accho, nor the
inhabit of zidon, nor of ahlab, nor of achzib, nor of helbah, nor
of aphik, nor of rehob: 1:32 but the asherit dwelt among the
canaanites, the inhabit of the land: for they did not drive them
out.

1:33 neither did naphtali drive out the inhabit of bethshemesh,
nor the inhabit of bethanath; but he dwelt among the canaanites,
th inhabit of the land: nevertheless the inhabit of
bethshemesh and of bethanath becam tributari unto them.

1:34 and the amorit forc the children of dan into the mountain:
for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley: 1:35 but
th amorit would dwell in mount here in aijalon, and in shaalbim:
yet the hand of the hous of joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries.

1:36 and the coast of the amorit wa from the go up to akrabbim,
from the rock, and upward.

2:1 and an angel of the lord came up from gilgal to bochim, and said,
i made you to go up out of egypt, and have brought you unto the land
which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my
coven with you.

2:2 and ye shall make no leagu with the inhabit of thi land; ye
shal throw down their altars: but ye have not obey my voice: why
hav ye done this?  2:3 wherefor I also said, I will not drive them
out from befor you; but they shall be as thorn in your sides, and
their god shall be a snare unto you.

2:4 and it came to pass, when the angel of the lord spake these words
unto all the children of israel, that the peopl lift up their
voice, and wept.

2:5 and they call the name of that place bochim: and they sacrificed
ther unto the lord.

2:6 and when joshua had let the peopl go, the children of israel went
everi man unto hi inherit to possess the land.

2:7 and the peopl serv the lord all the day of joshua, and all the
day of the elder that outliv joshua, who had seen all the great
work of the lord, that he did for israel.

2:8 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of the lord, died, be an
hundr and ten year old.

2:9 and they buri him in the border of hi inherit in
timnathheres, in the mount of ephraim, on the north side of the hill
gaash.

2:10 and also all that gener were gather unto their fathers:
and there aros anoth gener after them, which knew not the
lord, nor yet the work which he had done for israel.

2:11 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord, and
serv baalim: 2:12 and they forsook the lord god of their fathers,
which brought them out of the land of egypt, and follow other gods,
of the god of the peopl that were round about them, and bowed
themselv unto them, and provok the lord to anger.

2:13 and they forsook the lord, and serv baal and ashtaroth.

2:14 and the anger of the lord wa hot against israel, and he
deliv them into the hand of spoiler that spoil them, and he
sold them into the hand of their enemi round about, so that they
could not ani longer stand befor their enemies.

2:15 whithersoev they went out, the hand of the lord wa against
them for evil, as the lord had said, and as the lord had sworn unto
them: and they were greatli distressed.

2:16 nevertheless the lord rais up judges, which deliv them out
of the hand of those that spoil them.

2:17 and yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a
whor after other gods, and bow themselv unto them: they turned
quickli out of the way which their father walk in, obey the
command of the lord; but they did not so.

2:18 and when the lord rais them up judges, then the lord wa with
th judge, and deliv them out of the hand of their enemi all the
day of the judge: for it repent the lord becaus of their groanings
bi reason of them that oppress them and vex them.

2:19 and it came to pass, when the judg wa dead, that they returned,
and corrupt themselv more than their fathers, in follow other
god to serv them, and to bow down unto them; they ceas not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

2:20 and the anger of the lord wa hot against israel; and he said,
becaus that thi peopl hath transgress my coven which i
command their fathers, and have not hearken unto my voice; 2:21 i
also will not henceforth drive out ani from befor them of the nations
which joshua left when he died: 2:22 that through them I may prove
israel, whether they will keep the way of the lord to walk therein, as
their father did keep it, or not.

2:23 therefor the lord left those nations, without drive them out
hastily; neither deliv he them into the hand of joshua.

3:1 now these are the nation which the lord left, to prove israel by
them, even as mani of israel as had not known all the war of canaan;
3:2 onli that the gener of the children of israel might know, to
teach them war, at the least such as befor knew noth thereof; 3:3
namely, five lord of the philistines, and all the canaanites, and the
sidonians, and the hivit that dwelt in mount lebanon, from mount
baalhermon unto the enter in of hamath.

3:4 and they were to prove israel by them, to know whether they would
hearken unto the command of the lord, which he command their
fath by the hand of moses.

3:5 and the children of israel dwelt among the canaanites, hittites,
and amorites, and perizzites, and hivites, and jebusites: 3:6 and they
took their daughter to be their wives, and gave their daughter to
their sons, and serv their gods.

3:7 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord, and
forgat the lord their god, and serv baalim and the groves.

3:8 therefor the anger of the lord wa hot against israel, and he
sold them into the hand of chushanrishathaim king of mesopotamia: and
th children of israel serv chushanrishathaim eight years.

3:9 and when the children of israel cri unto the lord, the lord
rais up a deliver to the children of israel, who deliv them,
even othniel the son of kenaz, caleb' younger brother.

3:10 and the spirit of the lord came upon him, and he judg israel,
and went out to war: and the lord deliv chushanrishathaim king of
mesopotamia into hi hand; and hi hand prevail against
chushanrishathaim.

3:11 and the land had rest forti years. and othniel the son of kenaz
died.

3:12 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord: and the lord strengthen eglon the king of moab against israel,
becaus they had done evil in the sight of the lord.

3:13 and he gather unto him the children of ammon and amalek, and
went and smote israel, and possess the citi of palm trees.

3:14 So the children of israel serv eglon the king of moab eighteen
years.

3:15 but when the children of israel cri unto the lord, the lord
rais them up a deliverer, ehud the son of gera, a benjamite, a man
lefthanded: and by him the children of israel sent a present unto
eglon the king of moab.

3:16 but ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit
length; and he did gird it under hi raiment upon hi right thigh.

3:17 and he brought the present unto eglon king of moab: and eglon was
a veri fat man.

3:18 and when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away
th peopl that bare the present.

3:19 but he himself turn again from the quarri that were by
gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said,
keep silence. and all that stood by him went out from him.

3:20 and ehud came unto him; and he wa sit in a summer parlour,
which he had for himself alone. and ehud said, I have a messag from
god unto thee.

and he aros out of hi seat.

3:21 and ehud put forth hi left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into hi belly: 3:22 and the haft also went
in after the blade; and the fat close upon the blade, so that he
could not draw the dagger out of hi belly; and the dirt came out.

3:23 then ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the door of the
parlour upon him, and lock them.

3:24 when he wa gone out, hi servant came; and when they saw that,
behold, the door of the parlour were locked, they said, sure he
covereth hi feet in hi summer chamber.

3:25 and they tarri till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened
not the door of the parlour; therefor they took a key, and opened
them: and, behold, their lord wa fallen down dead on the earth.

3:26 and ehud escap while they tarried, and pass beyond the
quarries, and escap unto seirath.

3:27 and it came to pass, when he wa come, that he blew a trumpet in
th mountain of ephraim, and the children of israel went down with him
from the mount, and he befor them.

3:28 and he said unto them, follow after me: for the lord hath
deliv your enemi the moabit into your hand. and they went down
aft him, and took the ford of jordan toward moab, and suffer not
a man to pass over.

3:29 and they slew of moab at that time about ten thousand men, all
lusty, and all men of valour; and there escap not a man.

3:30 So moab wa subdu that day under the hand of israel. and the
land had rest fourscor years.

3:31 and after him wa shamgar the son of anath, which slew of the
philistin six hundr men with an ox goad: and he also delivered
israel.

4:1 and the children of israel again did evil in the sight of the
lord, when ehud wa dead.

4:2 and the lord sold them into the hand of jabin king of canaan, that
reign in hazor; the captain of whose host wa sisera, which dwelt in
harosheth of the gentiles.

4:3 and the children of israel cri unto the lord: for he had nine
hundr chariot of iron; and twenti year he mightili oppress the
children of israel.

4:4 and deborah, a prophetess, the wife of lapidoth, she judg israel
at that time.

4:5 and she dwelt under the palm tree of deborah between ramah and
bethel in mount ephraim: and the children of israel came up to her for
judgment.

4:6 and she sent and call barak the son of abinoam out of
kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, hath not the lord god of israel
commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount tabor, and take with thee
ten thousand men of the children of naphtali and of the children of
zebulun?  4:7 and I will draw unto thee to the river kishon sisera,
th captain of jabin' army, with hi chariot and hi multitude; and
i will deliv him into thine hand.

4:8 and barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go:
but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.

4:9 and she said, I will sure go with thee: notwithstand the
journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the lord
shal sell sisera into the hand of a woman. and deborah arose, and
went with barak to kedesh.

4:10 and barak call zebulun and naphtali to kedesh; and he went up
with ten thousand men at hi feet: and deborah went up with him.

4:11 now heber the kenite, which wa of the children of hobab the
fath in law of moses, had sever himself from the kenites, and
pitch hi tent unto the plain of zaanaim, which is by kedesh.

4:12 and they shew sisera that barak the son of abinoam wa gone up
to mount tabor.

4:13 and sisera gather togeth all hi chariots, even nine hundred
chariot of iron, and all the peopl that were with him, from
harosheth of the gentil unto the river of kishon.

4:14 and deborah said unto barak, up; for thi is the day in which the
lord hath deliv sisera into thine hand: is not the lord gone out
befor thee? So barak went down from mount tabor, and ten thousand men
aft him.

4:15 and the lord discomfit sisera, and all hi chariots, and all
hi host, with the edg of the sword befor barak; so that sisera
light down off hi chariot, and fled away on hi feet.

4:16 but barak pursu after the chariots, and after the host, unto
harosheth of the gentiles: and all the host of sisera fell upon the
edg of the sword; and there wa not a man left.

4:17 howbeit sisera fled away on hi feet to the tent of jael the wife
of heber the kenite: for there wa peac between jabin the king of
hazor and the hous of heber the kenite.

4:18 and jael went out to meet sisera, and said unto him, turn in, my
lord, turn in to me; fear not. and when he had turn in unto her into
th tent, she cover him with a mantle.

4:19 and he said unto her, give me, I pray thee, a littl water to
drink; for I am thirsty. and she open a bottl of milk, and gave him
drink, and cover him.

4:20 again he said unto her, stand in the door of the tent, and it
shal be, when ani man doth come and enquir of thee, and say, is
ther ani man here? that thou shalt say, no.

4:21 then jael heber' wife took a nail of the tent, and took an
hamm in her hand, and went softli unto him, and smote the nail into
hi temples, and fasten it into the ground: for he wa fast asleep
and weary. So he died.

4:22 and, behold, as barak pursu sisera, jael came out to meet him,
and said unto him, come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou
seekest. and when he came into her tent, behold, sisera lay dead, and
th nail wa in hi temples.

4:23 So god subdu on that day jabin the king of canaan befor the
children of israel.

4:24 and the hand of the children of israel prospered, and prevailed
against jabin the king of canaan, until they had destroy jabin king
of canaan.

5:1 then sang deborah and barak the son of abinoam on that day,
saying, 5:2 prais ye the lord for the aveng of israel, when the
peopl willingli offer themselves.

5:3 hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing
unto the lord; I will sing prais to the lord god of israel.

5:4 lord, when thou wentest out of seir, when thou marchedst out of
th field of edom, the earth trembled, and the heaven dropped, the
cloud also drop water.

5:5 the mountain melt from befor the lord, even that sinai from
befor the lord god of israel.

5:6 In the day of shamgar the son of anath, in the day of jael, the
highway were unoccupied, and the travel walk through byways.

5:7 the inhabit of the villag ceased, they ceas in israel,
until that I deborah arose, that I aros a mother in israel.

5:8 they chose new gods; then wa war in the gates: wa there a shield
or spear seen among forti thousand in israel?  5:9 My heart is toward
th governor of israel, that offer themselv willingli among the
people. bless ye the lord.

5:10 speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and
walk by the way.

5:11 they that are deliv from the nois of archer in the places
of draw water, there shall they rehears the righteou act of the
lord, even the righteou act toward the inhabit of hi villages
in israel: then shall the peopl of the lord go down to the gates.

5:12 awake, awake, deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, barak,
and lead thi captiv captive, thou son of abinoam.

5:13 then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles
among the people: the lord made me have dominion over the mighty.

5:14 out of ephraim wa there a root of them against amalek; after
thee, benjamin, among thi people; out of machir came down governors,
and out of zebulun they that handl the pen of the writer.

5:15 and the princ of issachar were with deborah; even issachar, and
also barak: he wa sent on foot into the valley. for the divis of
reuben there were great thought of heart.

5:16 whi abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleat of
th flocks? for the divis of reuben there were great search of
heart.

5:17 gilead abod beyond jordan: and whi did dan remain in ships?
ash continu on the sea shore, and abod in hi breaches.

5:18 zebulun and naphtali were a peopl that jeopard their lives
unto the death in the high place of the field.

5:19 the king came and fought, then fought the king of canaan in
taanach by the water of megiddo; they took no gain of money.

5:20 they fought from heaven; the star in their cours fought
against sisera.

5:21 the river of kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the
riv kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.

5:22 then were the horsehoof broken by the mean of the pransings,
th prans of their mighti ones.

5:23 curs ye meroz, said the angel of the lord, curs ye bitterli the
inhabit thereof; becaus they came not to the help of the lord, to
th help of the lord against the mighty.

5:24 bless abov women shall jael the wife of heber the kenit be,
bless shall she be abov women in the tent.

5:25 He ask water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter
in a lordli dish.

5:26 she put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's
hammer; and with the hammer she smote sisera, she smote off hi head,
when she had pierc and stricken through hi temples.

5:27 At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed,
h fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

5:28 the mother of sisera look out at a window, and cri through
th lattice, whi is hi chariot so long in coming? whi tarri the
wheel of hi chariots?  5:29 her wise ladi answer her, yea, she
return answer to herself, 5:30 have they not sped? have they not
divid the prey; to everi man a damsel or two; to sisera a prey of
div colours, a prey of diver colour of needlework, of divers
colour of needlework on both sides, meet for the neck of them that
tak the spoil?  5:31 So let all thine enemi perish, O lord: but let
them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in hi might. and
th land had rest forti years.

6:1 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord: and
th lord deliv them into the hand of midian seven years.

6:2 and the hand of midian prevail against israel: and becaus of
th midianit the children of israel made them the den which are in
th mountains, and caves, and strong holds.

6:3 and so it was, when israel had sown, that the midianit came up,
and the amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up
against them; 6:4 and they encamp against them, and destroy the
increas of the earth, till thou come unto gaza, and left no
susten for israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.

6:5 for they came up with their cattl and their tents, and they came
a grasshopp for multitude; for both they and their camel were
without number: and they enter into the land to destroy it.

6:6 and israel wa greatli impoverish becaus of the midianites; and
th children of israel cri unto the lord.

6:7 and it came to pass, when the children of israel cri unto the
lord becaus of the midianites, 6:8 that the lord sent a prophet unto
th children of israel, which said unto them, thu saith the lord god
of israel, I brought you up from egypt, and brought you forth out of
th hous of bondage; 6:9 and I deliv you out of the hand of the
egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppress you, and drave
them out from befor you, and gave you their land; 6:10 and I said
unto you, I am the lord your god; fear not the god of the amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obey my voice.

6:11 and there came an angel of the lord, and sat under an oak which
wa in ophrah, that pertain unto joash the abiezrite: and hi son
gideon thresh wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the
midianites.

6:12 and the angel of the lord appear unto him, and said unto him,
th lord is with thee, thou mighti man of valour.

6:13 and gideon said unto him, Oh my lord, if the lord be with us, why
then is all thi befallen us? and where be all hi miracl which our
fath told us of, saying, did not the lord bring us up from egypt?
but now the lord hath forsaken us, and deliv us into the hand of
th midianites.

6:14 and the lord look upon him, and said, Go in thi thi might, and
thou shalt save israel from the hand of the midianites: have not i
sent thee?  6:15 and he said unto him, Oh my lord, wherewith shall i
sav israel?  behold, my famili is poor in manasseh, and I am the
least in my father' house.

6:16 and the lord said unto him, sure I will be with thee, and thou
shalt smite the midianit as one man.

6:17 and he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thi sight,
then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.

6:18 depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring
forth my present, and set it befor thee. and he said, I will tarry
until thou come again.

6:19 and gideon went in, and made readi a kid, and unleaven cake of
an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth
in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and present it.

6:20 and the angel of god said unto him, take the flesh and the
unleaven cakes, and lay them upon thi rock, and pour out the broth.
and he did so.

6:21 then the angel of the lord put forth the end of the staff that
wa in hi hand, and touch the flesh and the unleaven cakes; and
ther rose up fire out of the rock, and consum the flesh and the
unleaven cakes. then the angel of the lord depart out of his
sight.

6:22 and when gideon perceiv that he wa an angel of the lord,
gideon said, alas, O lord god! for becaus I have seen an angel of the
lord face to face.

6:23 and the lord said unto him, peac be unto thee; fear not: thou
shalt not die.

6:24 then gideon built an altar there unto the lord, and call it
jehovahshalom: unto thi day it is yet in ophrah of the abiezrites.

6:25 and it came to pass the same night, that the lord said unto him,
tak thi father' young bullock, even the second bullock of seven
year old, and throw down the altar of baal that thi father hath, and
cut down the grove that is by it: 6:26 and build an altar unto the
lord thi god upon the top of thi rock, in the order place, and take
th second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrific with the wood of the
grov which thou shalt cut down.

6:27 then gideon took ten men of hi servants, and did as the lord had
said unto him: and so it was, becaus he fear hi father's
household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day,
that he did it by night.

6:28 and when the men of the citi aros earli in the morning, behold,
th altar of baal wa cast down, and the grove wa cut down that was
bi it, and the second bullock wa offer upon the altar that was
built.

6:29 and they said one to another, who hath done thi thing? and when
they enquir and asked, they said, gideon the son of joash hath done
thi thing.

6:30 then the men of the citi said unto joash, bring out thi son, that
h may die: becaus he hath cast down the altar of baal, and because
h hath cut down the grove that wa by it.

6:31 and joash said unto all that stood against him, will ye plead for
baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to
death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for
himself, becaus one hath cast down hi altar.

6:32 therefor on that day he call him jerubbaal, saying, let baal
plead against him, becaus he hath thrown down hi altar.

6:33 then all the midianit and the amalekit and the children of
th east were gather together, and went over, and pitch in the
valley of jezreel.

6:34 but the spirit of the lord came upon gideon, and he blew a
trumpet; and abiez wa gather after him.

6:35 and he sent messeng throughout all manasseh; who also was
gath after him: and he sent messeng unto asher, and unto
zebulun, and unto naphtali; and they came up to meet them.

6:36 and gideon said unto god, If thou wilt save israel by mine hand,
a thou hast said, 6:37 behold, I will put a fleec of wool in the
floor; and if the dew be on the fleec only, and it be dri upon all
th earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save israel by mine
hand, as thou hast said.

6:38 and it wa so: for he rose up earli on the morrow, and thrust the
fleec together, and wring the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water.

6:39 and gideon said unto god, let not thine anger be hot against me,
and I will speak but thi once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this
onc with the fleece; let it now be dri onli upon the fleece, and upon
al the ground let there be dew.

6:40 and god did so that night: for it wa dri upon the fleec only,
and there wa dew on all the ground.

7:1 then jerubbaal, who is gideon, and all the peopl that were with
him, rose up early, and pitch besid the well of harod: so that the
host of the midianit were on the north side of them, by the hill of
moreh, in the valley.

7:2 and the lord said unto gideon, the peopl that are with thee are
too mani for me to give the midianit into their hands, lest israel
vaunt themselv against me, saying, mine own hand hath save me.

7:3 now therefor go to, proclaim in the ear of the people, saying,
whosoev is fear and afraid, let him return and depart earli from
mount gilead. and there return of the peopl twenti and two
thousand; and there remain ten thousand.

7:4 and the lord said unto gideon, the peopl are yet too many; bring
them down unto the water, and I will tri them for thee there: and it
shal be, that of whom I say unto thee, thi shall go with thee, the
sam shall go with thee; and of whomsoev I say unto thee, thi shall
not go with thee, the same shall not go.

7:5 So he brought down the peopl unto the water: and the lord said
unto gideon, everi one that lappeth of the water with hi tongue, as a
dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewis everi one that
boweth down upon hi knee to drink.

7:6 and the number of them that lapped, put their hand to their
mouth, were three hundr men: but all the rest of the peopl bowed
down upon their knee to drink water.

7:7 and the lord said unto gideon, By the three hundr men that
lap will I save you, and deliv the midianit into thine hand:
and let all the other peopl go everi man unto hi place.

7:8 So the peopl took victual in their hand, and their trumpets: and
h sent all the rest of israel everi man unto hi tent, and retained
thos three hundr men: and the host of midian wa beneath him in the
valley.

7:9 and it came to pass the same night, that the lord said unto him,
arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have deliv it into thine
hand.

7:10 but if thou fear to go down, go thou with phurah thi servant down
to the host: 7:11 and thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward
shal thine hand be strengthen to go down unto the host. then went
h down with phurah hi servant unto the outsid of the arm men that
wer in the host.

7:12 and the midianit and the amalekit and all the children of the
east lay along in the valley like grasshopp for multitude; and
their camel were without number, as the sand by the sea side for
multitude.

7:13 and when gideon wa come, behold, there wa a man that told a
dream unto hi fellow, and said, behold, I dream a dream, and, lo, a
cak of barley bread tumbl into the host of midian, and came unto a
tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturn it, that the tent lay
along.

7:14 and hi fellow answer and said, thi is noth els save the
sword of gideon the son of joash, a man of israel: for into hi hand
hath god deliv midian, and all the host.

7:15 and it wa so, when gideon heard the tell of the dream, and
th interpret thereof, that he worshipped, and return into the
host of israel, and said, arise; for the lord hath deliv into your
hand the host of midian.

7:16 and he divid the three hundr men into three companies, and he
put a trumpet in everi man' hand, with empti pitchers, and lamps
within the pitchers.

7:17 and he said unto them, look on me, and do likewise: and, behold,
when I come to the outsid of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so
shal ye do.

7:18 when I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow
y the trumpet also on everi side of all the camp, and say, the sword
of the lord, and of gideon.

7:19 So gideon, and the hundr men that were with him, came unto the
outsid of the camp in the begin of the middl watch; and they had
but newli set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitch that were in their hands.

7:20 and the three compani blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers, and held the lamp in their left hands, and the trumpet in
their right hand to blow withal: and they cried, the sword of the
lord, and of gideon.

7:21 and they stood everi man in hi place round about the camp; and
al the host ran, and cried, and fled.

7:22 and the three hundr blew the trumpets, and the lord set every
man' sword against hi fellow, even throughout all the host: and the
host fled to bethshittah in zererath, and to the border of
abelmeholah, unto tabbath.

7:23 and the men of israel gather themselv togeth out of
naphtali, and out of asher, and out of all manasseh, and pursu after
th midianites.

7:24 and gideon sent messeng throughout all mount ephraim, saying,
com down against the midianites, and take befor them the water unto
bethbarah and jordan. then all the men of ephraim gather themselves
together, and took the water unto bethbarah and jordan.

7:25 and they took two princ of the midianites, oreb and zeeb; and
they slew oreb upon the rock oreb, and zeeb they slew at the winepress
of zeeb, and pursu midian, and brought the head of oreb and zeeb to
gideon on the other side jordan.

8:1 and the men of ephraim said unto him, whi hast thou serv us
thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the
midianites?  and they did chide with him sharply.

8:2 and he said unto them, what have I done now in comparison of you?
i not the glean of the grape of ephraim better than the vintage
of abiezer?  8:3 god hath deliv into your hand the princ of
midian, oreb and zeeb: and what wa I abl to do in comparison of you?
then their anger wa abat toward him, when he had said that.

8:4 and gideon came to jordan, and pass over, he, and the three
hundr men that were with him, faint, yet pursu them.

8:5 and he said unto the men of succoth, give, I pray you, loav of
bread unto the peopl that follow me; for they be faint, and I am
pursu after zebah and zalmunna, king of midian.

8:6 and the princ of succoth said, are the hand of zebah and
zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?
8:7 and gideon said, therefor when the lord hath deliv zebah and
zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns
of the wilder and with briers.

8:8 and he went up thenc to penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and
th men of penuel answer him as the men of succoth had answer him.

8:9 and he spake also unto the men of penuel, saying, when I come
again in peace, I will break down thi tower.

8:10 now zebah and zalmunna were in karkor, and their host with them,
about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the host of the
children of the east: for there fell an hundr and twenti thousand
men that drew sword.

8:11 and gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tent on the
east of nobah and jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was
secure.

8:12 and when zebah and zalmunna fled, he pursu after them, and took
th two king of midian, zebah and zalmunna, and discomfit all the
host.

8:13 and gideon the son of joash return from battl befor the sun
wa up, 8:14 and caught a young man of the men of succoth, and
enquir of him: and he describ unto him the princ of succoth, and
th elder thereof, even threescor and seventeen men.

8:15 and he came unto the men of succoth, and said, behold zebah and
zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, are the hand of zebah
and zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thi men
that are weary?  8:16 and he took the elder of the city, and thorns
of the wilder and briers, and with them he taught the men of
succoth.

8:17 and he beat down the tower of penuel, and slew the men of the
city.

8:18 then said he unto zebah and zalmunna, what manner of men were
they whom ye slew at tabor? and they answered, As thou art, so were
they; each one resembl the children of a king.

8:19 and he said, they were my brethren, even the son of my mother:
a the lord liveth, if ye had save them alive, I would not slay you.

8:20 and he said unto jether hi firstborn, up, and slay them. but the
youth drew not hi sword: for he feared, becaus he wa yet a youth.

8:21 then zebah and zalmunna said, rise thou, and fall upon us: for as
th man is, so is hi strength. and gideon arose, and slew zebah and
zalmunna, and took away the ornament that were on their camels'
necks.

8:22 then the men of israel said unto gideon, rule thou over us, both
thou, and thi son, and thi son' son also: for thou hast deliv us
from the hand of midian.

8:23 and gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither
shal my son rule over you: the lord shall rule over you.

8:24 and gideon said unto them, I would desir a request of you, that
y would give me everi man the ear of hi prey. (for they had
golden earrings, becaus they were ishmaelites.)  8:25 and they
answered, We will willingli give them. and they spread a garment, and
did cast therein everi man the ear of hi prey.

8:26 and the weight of the golden ear that he request wa a
thousand and seven hundr shekel of gold; besid ornaments, and
collars, and purpl raiment that wa on the king of midian, and
besid the chain that were about their camels' necks.

8:27 and gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in hi city, even in
ophrah: and all israel went thither a whore after it: which thing
becam a snare unto gideon, and to hi house.

8:28 thu wa midian subdu befor the children of israel, so that
they lift up their head no more. and the countri wa in quietness
forti year in the day of gideon.

8:29 and jerubba the son of joash went and dwelt in hi own house.

8:30 and gideon had threescor and ten son of hi bodi begotten: for
h had mani wives.

8:31 and hi concubin that wa in shechem, she also bare him a son,
whos name he call abimelech.

8:32 and gideon the son of joash die in a good old age, and was
buri in the sepulchr of joash hi father, in ophrah of the
abiezrites.

8:33 and it came to pass, as soon as gideon wa dead, that the
children of israel turn again, and went a whore after baalim, and
mad baalberith their god.

8:34 and the children of israel rememb not the lord their god, who
had deliv them out of the hand of all their enemi on every
side: 8:35 neither shew they kind to the hous of jerubbaal,
namely, gideon, accord to all the good which he had shew unto
israel.

9:1 and abimelech the son of jerubba went to shechem unto his
mother' brethren, and commun with them, and with all the famili of
th hous of hi mother' father, saying, 9:2 speak, I pray you, in
th ear of all the men of shechem, whether is better for you, either
that all the son of jerubbaal, which are threescor and ten persons,
reign over you, or that one reign over you? rememb also that I am
your bone and your flesh.

9:3 and hi mother' brethren spake of him in the ear of all the men
of shechem all these words: and their heart inclin to follow
abimelech; for they said, He is our brother.

9:4 and they gave him threescor and ten piec of silver out of the
hous of baalberith, wherewith abimelech hire vain and light persons,
which follow him.

9:5 and he went unto hi father' hous at ophrah, and slew his
brethren the son of jerubbaal, be threescor and ten persons, upon
on stone: notwithstand yet jotham the youngest son of jerubbaal
wa left; for he hid himself.

9:6 and all the men of shechem gather together, and all the hous of
millo, and went, and made abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
that wa in shechem.

9:7 and when they told it to jotham, he went and stood in the top of
mount gerizim, and lift up hi voice, and cried, and said unto them,
hearken unto me, ye men of shechem, that god may hearken unto you.

9:8 the tree went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and
they said unto the oliv tree, reign thou over us.

9:9 but the oliv tree said unto them, should I leav my fatness,
wherewith by me they honour god and man, and go to be promot over
th trees?  9:10 and the tree said to the fig tree, come thou, and
reign over us.

9:11 but the fig tree said unto them, should I forsak my sweetness,
and my good fruit, and go to be promot over the trees?  9:12 then
said the tree unto the vine, come thou, and reign over us.

9:13 and the vine said unto them, should I leav my wine, which
cheereth god and man, and go to be promot over the trees?  9:14 then
said all the tree unto the bramble, come thou, and reign over us.

9:15 and the brambl said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me
k over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not,
let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedar of lebanon.

9:16 now therefore, if ye have done truli and sincerely, in that ye
hav made abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with jerubba and
hi house, and have done unto him accord to the deserv of his
hands; 9:17 (for my father fought for you, and adventur hi life
far, and deliv you out of the hand of midian: 9:18 and ye are
risen up against my father' hous thi day, and have slain hi sons,
threescor and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made abimelech,
th son of hi maidservant, king over the men of shechem, becaus he
i your brother;) 9:19 If ye then have dealt truli and sincer with
jerubba and with hi hous thi day, then rejoic ye in abimelech,
and let him also rejoic in you: 9:20 but if not, let fire come out
from abimelech, and devour the men of shechem, and the hous of millo;
and let fire come out from the men of shechem, and from the hous of
millo, and devour abimelech.

9:21 and jotham ran away, and fled, and went to beer, and dwelt there,
for fear of abimelech hi brother.

9:22 when abimelech had reign three year over israel, 9:23 then god
sent an evil spirit between abimelech and the men of shechem; and the
men of shechem dealt treacher with abimelech: 9:24 that the
cruelti done to the threescor and ten son of jerubba might come,
and their blood be laid upon abimelech their brother, which slew them;
and upon the men of shechem, which aid him in the kill of his
brethren.

9:25 and the men of shechem set lier in wait for him in the top of
th mountains, and they rob all that came along that way by them:
and it wa told abimelech.

9:26 and gaal the son of ebe came with hi brethren, and went over to
shechem: and the men of shechem put their confid in him.

9:27 and they went out into the fields, and gather their vineyards,
and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the hous of their
god, and did eat and drink, and curs abimelech.

9:28 and gaal the son of ebe said, who is abimelech, and who is
shechem, that we should serv him? is not he the son of jerubbaal? and
zebul hi officer? serv the men of hamor the father of shechem: for
whi should we serv him?  9:29 and would to god thi peopl were under
mi hand! then would I remov abimelech. and he said to abimelech,
increas thine army, and come out.

9:30 and when zebul the ruler of the citi heard the word of gaal the
son of ebed, hi anger wa kindled.

9:31 and he sent messeng unto abimelech privily, saying, behold,
ga the son of ebe and hi brethren be come to shechem; and, behold,
they fortifi the citi against thee.

9:32 now therefor up by night, thou and the peopl that is with thee,
and lie in wait in the field: 9:33 and it shall be, that in the
morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon
th city: and, behold, when he and the peopl that is with him come
out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find
occasion.

9:34 and abimelech rose up, and all the peopl that were with him, by
night, and they laid wait against shechem in four companies.

9:35 and gaal the son of ebe went out, and stood in the enter of
th gate of the city: and abimelech rose up, and the peopl that were
with him, from lie in wait.

9:36 and when gaal saw the people, he said to zebul, behold, there
com peopl down from the top of the mountains. and zebul said unto
him, thou seest the shadow of the mountain as if they were men.

9:37 and gaal spake again, and said, see there come peopl down by the
middl of the land, and anoth compani come along by the plain of
meonenim.

9:38 then said zebul unto him, where is now thi mouth, wherewith thou
saidst, who is abimelech, that we should serv him? is not thi the
peopl that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with
them.

9:39 and gaal went out befor the men of shechem, and fought with
abimelech.

9:40 and abimelech chase him, and he fled befor him, and mani were
overthrown and wounded, even unto the enter of the gate.

9:41 and abimelech dwelt at arumah: and zebul thrust out gaal and his
brethren, that they should not dwell in shechem.

9:42 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the peopl went out into
th field; and they told abimelech.

9:43 and he took the people, and divid them into three companies,
and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the peopl were
com forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote
them.

9:44 and abimelech, and the compani that wa with him, rush forward,
and stood in the enter of the gate of the city: and the two other
compani ran upon all the peopl that were in the fields, and slew
them.

9:45 and abimelech fought against the citi all that day; and he took
th city, and slew the peopl that wa therein, and beat down the
city, and sow it with salt.

9:46 and when all the men of the tower of shechem heard that, they
ent into an hold of the hous of the god berith.

9:47 and it wa told abimelech, that all the men of the tower of
shechem were gather together.

9:48 and abimelech gat him up to mount zalmon, he and all the people
that were with him; and abimelech took an axe in hi hand, and cut
down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on hi shoulder,
and said unto the peopl that were with him, what ye have seen me do,
mak haste, and do as I have done.

9:49 and all the peopl likewis cut down everi man hi bough, and
follow abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire
upon them; so that all the men of the tower of shechem die also,
about a thousand men and women.

9:50 then went abimelech to thebez, and encamp against thebez, and
took it.

9:51 but there wa a strong tower within the city, and thither fled
al the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them,
and gat them up to the top of the tower.

9:52 and abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and
went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

9:53 and a certain woman cast a piec of a millston upon abimelech's
head, and all to brake hi skull.

9:54 then he call hastili unto the young man hi armourbearer, and
said unto him, draw thi sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, a
women slew him. and hi young man thrust him through, and he died.

9:55 and when the men of israel saw that abimelech wa dead, they
depart everi man unto hi place.

9:56 thu god render the wicked of abimelech, which he did unto
hi father, in slay hi seventi brethren: 9:57 and all the evil of
th men of shechem did god render upon their heads: and upon them came
th curs of jotham the son of jerubbaal.

10:1 and after abimelech there aros to defend israel tola the son of
puah, the son of dodo, a man of issachar; and he dwelt in shamir in
mount ephraim.

10:2 and he judg israel twenti and three years, and died, and was
buri in shamir.

10:3 and after him aros jair, a gileadite, and judg israel twenty
and two years.

10:4 and he had thirti son that rode on thirti ass colts, and they
had thirti cities, which are call havothjair unto thi day, which
ar in the land of gilead.

10:5 and jair died, and wa buri in camon.

10:6 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord, and serv baalim, and ashtaroth, and the god of syria, and the
god of zidon, and the god of moab, and the god of the children of
ammon, and the god of the philistines, and forsook the lord, and
serv not him.

10:7 and the anger of the lord wa hot against israel, and he sold
them into the hand of the philistines, and into the hand of the
children of ammon.

10:8 and that year they vex and oppress the children of israel:
eighteen years, all the children of israel that were on the other side
jordan in the land of the amorites, which is in gilead.

10:9 moreov the children of ammon pass over jordan to fight also
against judah, and against benjamin, and against the hous of ephraim;
so that israel wa sore distressed.

10:10 and the children of israel cri unto the lord, saying, We have
sin against thee, both becaus we have forsaken our god, and also
serv baalim.

10:11 and the lord said unto the children of israel, did not I deliver
y from the egyptians, and from the amorites, from the children of
ammon, and from the philistines?  10:12 the zidonian also, and the
amalekites, and the maonites, did oppress you; and ye cri to me, and
i deliv you out of their hand.

10:13 yet ye have forsaken me, and serv other gods: wherefor I will
deliv you no more.

10:14 Go and cri unto the god which ye have chosen; let them deliver
y in the time of your tribulation.

10:15 and the children of israel said unto the lord, We have sinned:
do thou unto us whatsoev seemeth good unto thee; deliv us only, we
pray thee, thi day.

10:16 and they put away the strang god from among them, and served
th lord: and hi soul wa griev for the miseri of israel.

10:17 then the children of ammon were gather together, and encamped
in gilead. and the children of israel assembl themselv together,
and encamp in mizpeh.

10:18 and the peopl and princ of gilead said one to another, what
man is he that will begin to fight against the children of ammon? he
shal be head over all the inhabit of gilead.

11:1 now jephthah the gileadit wa a mighti man of valour, and he was
th son of an harlot: and gilead begat jephthah.

11:2 and gilead' wife bare him sons; and hi wife' son grew up, and
they thrust out jephthah, and said unto him, thou shalt not inherit in
our father' house; for thou art the son of a strang woman.

11:3 then jephthah fled from hi brethren, and dwelt in the land of
tob: and there were gather vain men to jephthah, and went out with
him.

11:4 and it came to pass in process of time, that the children of
ammon made war against israel.

11:5 and it wa so, that when the children of ammon made war against
israel, the elder of gilead went to fetch jephthah out of the land of
tob: 11:6 and they said unto jephthah, come, and be our captain, that
w may fight with the children of ammon.

11:7 and jephthah said unto the elder of gilead, did not ye hate me,
and expel me out of my father' house? and whi are ye come unto me now
when ye are in distress?  11:8 and the elder of gilead said unto
jephthah, therefor we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go
with us, and fight against the children of ammon, and be our head over
al the inhabit of gilead.

11:9 and jephthah said unto the elder of gilead, If ye bring me home
again to fight against the children of ammon, and the lord deliver
them befor me, shall I be your head?  11:10 and the elder of gilead
said unto jephthah, the lord be wit between us, if we do not so
accord to thi words.

11:11 then jephthah went with the elder of gilead, and the people
mad him head and captain over them: and jephthah utter all his
word befor the lord in mizpeh.

11:12 and jephthah sent messeng unto the king of the children of
ammon, saying, what hast thou to do with me, that thou art come
against me to fight in my land?  11:13 and the king of the children of
ammon answer unto the messeng of jephthah, becaus israel took
away my land, when they came up out of egypt, from arnon even unto
jabbok, and unto jordan: now therefor restor those land again
peaceably.

11:14 and jephthah sent messeng again unto the king of the children
of ammon: 11:15 and said unto him, thu saith jephthah, israel took
not away the land of moab, nor the land of the children of ammon:
11:16 but when israel came up from egypt, and walk through the
wild unto the red sea, and came to kadesh; 11:17 then israel
s messeng unto the king of edom, saying, let me, I pray thee,
pass through thi land: but the king of edom would not hearken thereto.
and in like manner they sent unto the king of moab: but he would not
consent: and israel abod in kadesh.

11:18 then they went along through the wilderness, and compass the
land of edom, and the land of moab, and came by the east side of the
land of moab, and pitch on the other side of arnon, but came not
within the border of moab: for arnon wa the border of moab.

11:19 and israel sent messeng unto sihon king of the amorites, the
k of heshbon; and israel said unto him, let us pass, we pray thee,
through thi land into my place.

11:20 but sihon trust not israel to pass through hi coast: but
sihon gather all hi peopl together, and pitch in jahaz, and
fought against israel.

11:21 and the lord god of israel deliv sihon and all hi people
into the hand of israel, and they smote them: so israel possess all
th land of the amorites, the inhabit of that country.

11:22 and they possess all the coast of the amorites, from arnon
even unto jabbok, and from the wilder even unto jordan.

11:23 So now the lord god of israel hath dispossess the amorites
from befor hi peopl israel, and shouldest thou possess it?  11:24
wilt not thou possess that which chemosh thi god giveth thee to
possess? So whomsoev the lord our god shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess.

11:25 and now art thou ani thing better than balak the son of zippor,
k of moab? did he ever strive against israel, or did he ever fight
against them, 11:26 while israel dwelt in heshbon and her towns, and
in aroer and her towns, and in all the citi that be along by the
coast of arnon, three hundr years? whi therefor did ye not recover
them within that time?  11:27 wherefor I have not sin against
thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the lord the judg be
judg thi day between the children of israel and the children of
ammon.

11:28 howbeit the king of the children of ammon hearken not unto the
word of jephthah which he sent him.

11:29 then the spirit of the lord came upon jephthah, and he passed
ov gilead, and manasseh, and pass over mizpeh of gilead, and from
mizpeh of gilead he pass over unto the children of ammon.

11:30 and jephthah vow a vow unto the lord, and said, If thou shalt
without fail deliv the children of ammon into mine hands, 11:31 then
it shall be, that whatsoev cometh forth of the door of my hous to
meet me, when I return in peac from the children of ammon, shall
sur be the lord's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.

11:32 So jephthah pass over unto the children of ammon to fight
against them; and the lord deliv them into hi hands.

11:33 and he smote them from aroer, even till thou come to minnith,
even twenti cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very
great slaughter. thu the children of ammon were subdu befor the
children of israel.

11:34 and jephthah came to mizpeh unto hi house, and, behold, his
daught came out to meet him with timbrel and with dances: and she
wa hi onli child; besid her he had neither son nor daughter.

11:35 and it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent hi clothes,
and said, alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me veri low, and thou
art one of them that troubl me: for I have open my mouth unto the
lord, and I cannot go back.

11:36 and she said unto him, My father, if thou hast open thi mouth
unto the lord, do to me accord to that which hath proceed out of
thi mouth; forasmuch as the lord hath taken vengeanc for thee of
thin enemies, even of the children of ammon.

11:37 and she said unto her father, let thi thing be done for me: let
m alon two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and
bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.

11:38 and he said, go. and he sent her away for two months: and she
went with her companions, and bewail her virgin upon the
mountains.

11:39 and it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned
unto her father, who did with her accord to hi vow which he had
vowed: and she knew no man. and it wa a custom in israel, 11:40 that
th daughter of israel went yearli to lament the daughter of jephthah
th gileadit four day in a year.

12:1 and the men of ephraim gather themselv together, and went
northward, and said unto jephthah, wherefor passedst thou over to
fight against the children of ammon, and didst not call us to go with
thee? we will burn thine hous upon thee with fire.

12:2 and jephthah said unto them, I and my peopl were at great strife
with the children of ammon; and when I call you, ye deliv me not
out of their hands.

12:3 and when I saw that ye deliv me not, I put my life in my
hands, and pass over against the children of ammon, and the lord
deliv them into my hand: wherefor then are ye come up unto me
thi day, to fight against me?  12:4 then jephthah gather together
al the men of gilead, and fought with ephraim: and the men of gilead
smot ephraim, becaus they said, Ye gileadit are fugit of
ephraim among the ephraimites, and among the manassites.

12:5 and the gileadit took the passag of jordan befor the
ephraimites: and it wa so, that when those ephraimit which were
escap said, let me go over; that the men of gilead said unto him,
art thou an ephraimite? If he said, nay; 12:6 then said they unto him,
say now shibboleth: and he said sibboleth: for he could not frame to
pronounc it right. then they took him, and slew him at the passages
of jordan: and there fell at that time of the ephraimit forti and
two thousand.

12:7 and jephthah judg israel six years. then die jephthah the
gileadite, and wa buri in one of the citi of gilead.

12:8 and after him ibzan of bethlehem judg israel.

12:9 and he had thirti sons, and thirti daughters, whom he sent
abroad, and took in thirti daughter from abroad for hi sons. and he
judg israel seven years.

12:10 then die ibzan, and wa buri at bethlehem.

12:11 and after him elon, a zebulonite, judg israel; and he judged
israel ten years.

12:12 and elon the zebulonit died, and wa buri in aijalon in the
countri of zebulun.

12:13 and after him abdon the son of hillel, a pirathonite, judged
israel.

12:14 and he had forti son and thirti nephews, that rode on
threescor and ten ass colts: and he judg israel eight years.

12:15 and abdon the son of hillel the pirathonit died, and wa buried
in pirathon in the land of ephraim, in the mount of the amalekites.

13:1 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord; and the lord deliv them into the hand of the philistines
forti years.

13:2 and there wa a certain man of zorah, of the famili of the
danites, whose name wa manoah; and hi wife wa barren, and bare not.

13:3 and the angel of the lord appear unto the woman, and said unto
her, behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son.

13:4 now therefor beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong
drink, and eat not ani unclean thing: 13:5 for, lo, thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on hi head: for the
child shall be a nazarit unto god from the womb: and he shall begin
to deliv israel out of the hand of the philistines.

13:6 then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of god
cam unto me, and hi counten wa like the counten of an angel
of god, veri terrible: but I ask him not whenc he was, neither told
h me hi name: 13:7 but he said unto me, behold, thou shalt conceive,
and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat
ani unclean thing: for the child shall be a nazarit to god from the
womb to the day of hi death.

13:8 then manoah intreat the lord, and said, O my lord, let the man
of god which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we
shal do unto the child that shall be born.

13:9 and god hearken to the voic of manoah; and the angel of god
cam again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but manoah her
husband wa not with her.

13:10 and the woman made haste, and ran, and shew her husband, and
said unto him, behold, the man hath appear unto me, that came unto
m the other day.

13:11 and manoah arose, and went after hi wife, and came to the man,
and said unto him, art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? and
h said, I am.

13:12 and manoah said, now let thi word come to pass. how shall we
ord the child, and how shall we do unto him?  13:13 and the angel of
th lord said unto manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her
beware.

13:14 she may not eat of ani thing that cometh of the vine, neither
let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat ani unclean thing: all
that I command her let her observe.

13:15 and manoah said unto the angel of the lord, I pray thee, let us
detain thee, until we shall have made readi a kid for thee.

13:16 and the angel of the lord said unto manoah, though thou detain
me, I will not eat of thi bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt
offering, thou must offer it unto the lord. for manoah knew not that
h wa an angel of the lord.

13:17 and manoah said unto the angel of the lord, what is thi name,
that when thi say come to pass we may do thee honour?  13:18 and
th angel of the lord said unto him, whi askest thou thu after my
name, see it is secret?  13:19 So manoah took a kid with a meat
offering, and offer it upon a rock unto the lord: and the angel did
wonderously; and manoah and hi wife look on.

13:20 for it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from
off the altar, that the angel of the lord ascend in the flame of the
altar. and manoah and hi wife look on it, and fell on their faces
to the ground.

13:21 but the angel of the lord did no more appear to manoah and to
hi wife. then manoah knew that he wa an angel of the lord.

13:22 and manoah said unto hi wife, We shall sure die, becaus we
hav seen god.

13:23 but hi wife said unto him, If the lord were pleas to kill us,
h would not have receiv a burnt offer and a meat offer at our
hands, neither would he have shew us all these things, nor would as
at thi time have told us such thing as these.

13:24 and the woman bare a son, and call hi name samson: and the
child grew, and the lord bless him.

13:25 and the spirit of the lord began to move him at time in the
camp of dan between zorah and eshtaol.

14:1 and samson went down to timnath, and saw a woman in timnath of
th daughter of the philistines.

14:2 and he came up, and told hi father and hi mother, and said, i
hav seen a woman in timnath of the daughter of the philistines: now
therefor get her for me to wife.

14:3 then hi father and hi mother said unto him, Is there never a
woman among the daughter of thi brethren, or among all my people,
that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcis philistines? and
samson said unto hi father, get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.

14:4 but hi father and hi mother knew not that it wa of the lord,
that he sought an occas against the philistines: for at that time
th philistin had dominion over israel.

14:5 then went samson down, and hi father and hi mother, to timnath,
and came to the vineyard of timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared
against him.

14:6 and the spirit of the lord came mightili upon him, and he rent
him as he would have rent a kid, and he had noth in hi hand: but
h told not hi father or hi mother what he had done.

14:7 and he went down, and talk with the woman; and she pleased
samson well.

14:8 and after a time he return to take her, and he turn asid to
se the carcas of the lion: and, behold, there wa a swarm of bees
and honey in the carcas of the lion.

14:9 and he took thereof in hi hands, and went on eating, and came to
hi father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told
not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcas of the lion.

14:10 So hi father went down unto the woman: and samson made there a
feast; for so use the young men to do.

14:11 and it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty
companion to be with him.

14:12 and samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddl unto
you: if ye can certainli declar it me within the seven day of the
feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirti sheet and thirty
chang of garments: 14:13 but if ye cannot declar it me, then shall
y give me thirti sheet and thirti chang of garments. and they said
unto him, put forth thi riddle, that we may hear it.

14:14 and he said unto them, out of the eater came forth meat, and out
of the strong came forth sweetness. and they could not in three days
expound the riddle.

14:15 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto
samson' wife, entic thi husband, that he may declar unto us the
riddle, lest we burn thee and thi father' hous with fire: have ye
cal us to take that we have? is it not so?  14:16 and samson' wife
wept befor him, and said, thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not:
thou hast put forth a riddl unto the children of my people, and hast
not told it me. and he said unto her, behold, I have not told it my
fath nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?  14:17 and she wept
befor him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to
pass on the seventh day, that he told her, becaus she lay sore upon
him: and she told the riddl to the children of her people.

14:18 and the men of the citi said unto him on the seventh day before
th sun went down, what is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger
than a lion?  and he said unto them, If ye had not plow with my
heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.

14:19 and the spirit of the lord came upon him, and he went down to
ashkelon, and slew thirti men of them, and took their spoil, and gave
chang of garment unto them which expound the riddle. and hi anger
wa kindled, and he went up to hi father' house.

14:20 but samson' wife wa given to hi companion, whom he had used
a hi friend.

15:1 but it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat
harvest, that samson visit hi wife with a kid; and he said, I will
go in to my wife into the chamber. but her father would not suffer him
to go in.

15:2 and her father said, I verili thought that thou hadst utterly
h her; therefor I gave her to thi companion: is not her younger
sist fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.

15:3 and samson said concern them, now shall I be more blameless
than the philistines, though I do them a displeasure.

15:4 and samson went and caught three hundr foxes, and took
firebrands, and turn tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst
between two tails.

15:5 and when he had set the brand on fire, he let them go into the
stand corn of the philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and
also the stand corn, with the vineyard and olives.

15:6 then the philistin said, who hath done this? and they answered,
samson, the son in law of the timnite, becaus he had taken hi wife,
and given her to hi companion. and the philistin came up, and burnt
her and her father with fire.

15:7 and samson said unto them, though ye have done this, yet will i
b aveng of you, and after that I will cease.

15:8 and he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he
went down and dwelt in the top of the rock etam.

15:9 then the philistin went up, and pitch in judah, and spread
themselv in lehi.

15:10 and the men of judah said, whi are ye come up against us? and
they answered, To bind samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath
don to us.

15:11 then three thousand men of judah went to the top of the rock
etam, and said to samson, knowest thou not that the philistin are
rul over us? what is thi that thou hast done unto us? and he said
unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.

15:12 and they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we
may deliv thee into the hand of the philistines. and samson said
unto them, swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.

15:13 and they spake unto him, saying, no; but we will bind thee fast,
and deliv thee into their hand: but sure we will not kill thee.
and they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the
rock.

15:14 and when he came unto lehi, the philistin shout against him:
and the spirit of the lord came mightili upon him, and the cord that
wer upon hi arm becam as flax that wa burnt with fire, and his
band loos from off hi hands.

15:15 and he found a new jawbon of an ass, and put forth hi hand,
and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.

15:16 and samson said, with the jawbon of an ass, heap upon heaps,
with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.

15:17 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that
h cast away the jawbon out of hi hand, and call that place
ramathlehi.

15:18 and he wa sore athirst, and call on the lord, and said, thou
hast given thi great deliver into the hand of thi servant: and
now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised?  15:19 but god clave an hollow place that wa in the
jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, hi spirit
cam again, and he revived: wherefor he call the name thereof
enhakkore, which is in lehi unto thi day.

15:20 and he judg israel in the day of the philistin twenty
years.

16:1 then went samson to gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in
unto her.

16:2 and it wa told the gazites, saying, samson is come hither. and
they compass him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of
th city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when
it is day, we shall kill him.

16:3 and samson lay till midnight, and aros at midnight, and took the
door of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with
them, bar and all, and put them upon hi shoulders, and carri them
up to the top of an hill that is befor hebron.

16:4 and it came to pass afterward, that he love a woman in the
valley of sorek, whose name wa delilah.

16:5 and the lord of the philistin came up unto her, and said unto
her, entic him, and see wherein hi great strength lieth, and by what
mean we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him;
and we will give thee everi one of us eleven hundr piec of silver.

16:6 and delilah said to samson, tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy
great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict
thee.

16:7 and samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs
that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as anoth man.

16:8 then the lord of the philistin brought up to her seven green
with which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.

16:9 now there were men lie in wait, abid with her in the
chamber.

and she said unto him, the philistin be upon thee, samson. and he
brak the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the
fire. So hi strength wa not known.

16:10 and delilah said unto samson, behold, thou hast mock me, and
told me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be
bound.

16:11 and he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new rope that
nev were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as anoth man.

16:12 delilah therefor took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and
said unto him, the philistin be upon thee, samson. and there were
li in wait abid in the chamber. and he brake them from off his
arm like a thread.

16:13 and delilah said unto samson, hitherto thou hast mock me, and
told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. and he said
unto her, If thou weavest the seven lock of my head with the web.

16:14 and she fasten it with the pin, and said unto him, the
philistin be upon thee, samson. and he awak out of hi sleep, and
went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.

16:15 and she said unto him, how canst thou say, I love thee, when
thin heart is not with me? thou hast mock me these three times, and
hast not told me wherein thi great strength lieth.

16:16 and it came to pass, when she press him daili with her words,
and urg him, so that hi soul wa vex unto death; 16:17 that he
told her all hi heart, and said unto her, there hath not come a razor
upon mine head; for I have been a nazarit unto god from my mother's
womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall
becom weak, and be like ani other man.

16:18 and when delilah saw that he had told her all hi heart, she
sent and call for the lord of the philistines, saying, come up this
once, for he hath shew me all hi heart. then the lord of the
philistin came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

16:19 and she made him sleep upon her knees; and she call for a man,
and she caus him to shave off the seven lock of hi head; and she
began to afflict him, and hi strength went from him.

16:20 and she said, the philistin be upon thee, samson. and he awoke
out of hi sleep, and said, I will go out as at other time before,
and shake myself. and he wist not that the lord wa depart from him.

16:21 but the philistin took him, and put out hi eyes, and brought
him down to gaza, and bound him with fetter of brass; and he did
grind in the prison house.

16:22 howbeit the hair of hi head began to grow again after he was
shaven.

16:23 then the lord of the philistin gather them togeth for to
off a great sacrific unto dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, our god hath deliv samson our enemi into our hand.

16:24 and when the peopl saw him, they prais their god: for they
said, our god hath deliv into our hand our enemy, and the
destroy of our country, which slew mani of us.

16:25 and it came to pass, when their heart were merry, that they
said, call for samson, that he may make us sport. and they call for
samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set
him between the pillars.

16:26 and samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, suffer
m that I may feel the pillar whereupon the hous standeth, that i
may lean upon them.

16:27 now the hous wa full of men and women; and all the lord of
th philistin were there; and there were upon the roof about three
thousand men and women, that beheld while samson made sport.

16:28 and samson call unto the lord, and said, O lord god, remember
me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, onli thi once, o
god, that I may be at onc aveng of the philistin for my two eyes.

16:29 and samson took hold of the two middl pillar upon which the
hous stood, and on which it wa born up, of the one with hi right
hand, and of the other with hi left.

16:30 and samson said, let me die with the philistines. and he bowed
himself with all hi might; and the hous fell upon the lords, and
upon all the peopl that were therein. So the dead which he slew at
hi death were more than they which he slew in hi life.

16:31 then hi brethren and all the hous of hi father came down, and
took him, and brought him up, and buri him between zorah and eshtaol
in the buryingplac of manoah hi father. and he judg israel twenty
years.

17:1 and there wa a man of mount ephraim, whose name wa micah.

17:2 and he said unto hi mother, the eleven hundr shekel of silver
that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of
also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. and his
moth said, bless be thou of the lord, my son.

17:3 and when he had restor the eleven hundr shekel of silver to
hi mother, hi mother said, I had wholli dedic the silver unto
th lord from my hand for my son, to make a graven imag and a molten
image: now therefor I will restor it unto thee.

17:4 yet he restor the money unto hi mother; and hi mother took
two hundr shekel of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made
thereof a graven imag and a molten image: and they were in the house
of micah.

17:5 and the man micah had an hous of gods, and made an ephod, and
teraphim, and consecr one of hi sons, who becam hi priest.

17:6 In those day there wa no king in israel, but everi man did that
which wa right in hi own eyes.

17:7 and there wa a young man out of bethlehemjudah of the famili of
judah, who wa a levite, and he sojourn there.

17:8 and the man depart out of the citi from bethlehemjudah to
sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount ephraim to
th hous of micah, as he journeyed.

17:9 and micah said unto him, whenc comest thou? and he said unto
him, I am a levit of bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may
find a place.

17:10 and micah said unto him, dwell with me, and be unto me a father
and a priest, and I will give thee ten shekel of silver by the year,
and a suit of apparel, and thi victuals. So the levit went in.

17:11 and the levit wa content to dwell with the man; and the young
man wa unto him as one of hi sons.

17:12 and micah consecr the levite; and the young man becam his
priest, and wa in the hous of micah.

17:13 then said micah, now know I that the lord will do me good,
se I have a levit to my priest.

18:1 In those day there wa no king in israel: and in those day the
trib of the danit sought them an inherit to dwell in; for unto
that day all their inherit had not fallen unto them among the
trib of israel.

18:2 and the children of dan sent of their famili five men from their
coasts, men of valour, from zorah, and from eshtaol, to spi out the
land, and to search it; and they said unto them, go, search the land:
who when they came to mount ephraim, to the hous of micah, they
lodg there.

18:3 when they were by the hous of micah, they knew the voic of the
young man the levite: and they turn in thither, and said unto him,
who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in thi place? and what
hast thou here?  18:4 and he said unto them, thu and thu dealeth
micah with me, and hath hire me, and I am hi priest.

18:5 and they said unto him, ask counsel, we pray thee, of god, that
w may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.

18:6 and the priest said unto them, Go in peace: befor the lord is
your way wherein ye go.

18:7 then the five men departed, and came to laish, and saw the people
that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
zidonians, quiet and secure; and there wa no magistr in the land,
that might put them to shame in ani thing; and they were far from the
zidonians, and had no busi with ani man.

18:8 and they came unto their brethren to zorah and eshtaol: and their
brethren said unto them, what say ye?  18:9 and they said, arise, that
w may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it
i veri good: and are ye still? be not sloth to go, and to enter to
possess the land.

18:10 when ye go, ye shall come unto a peopl secure, and to a large
land: for god hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no
want of ani thing that is in the earth.

18:11 and there went from thenc of the famili of the danites, out of
zorah and out of eshtaol, six hundr men appoint with weapon of
war.

18:12 and they went up, and pitch in kirjathjearim, in judah:
wherefor they call that place mahanehdan unto thi day: behold, it
i behind kirjathjearim.

18:13 and they pass thenc unto mount ephraim, and came unto the
hous of micah.

18:14 then answer the five men that went to spi out the countri of
laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these
hous an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image?
now therefor consid what ye have to do.

18:15 and they turn thitherward, and came to the hous of the young
man the levite, even unto the hous of micah, and salut him.

18:16 and the six hundr men appoint with their weapon of war,
which were of the children of dan, stood by the enter of the gate.

18:17 and the five men that went to spi out the land went up, and came
in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the
teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering
of the gate with the six hundr men that were appoint with weapons
of war.

18:18 and these went into micah' house, and fetch the carv image,
th ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. then said the
priest unto them, what do ye?  18:19 and they said unto him, hold thy
peace, lay thine hand upon thi mouth, and go with us, and be to us a
fath and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the
hous of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family
in israel?  18:20 and the priest' heart wa glad, and he took the
ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst
of the people.

18:21 So they turn and departed, and put the littl one and the
cattl and the carriag befor them.

18:22 and when they were a good way from the hous of micah, the men
that were in the hous near to micah' hous were gather together,
and overtook the children of dan.

18:23 and they cri unto the children of dan. and they turn their
faces, and said unto micah, what aileth thee, that thou comest with
such a company?  18:24 and he said, Ye have taken away my god which i
made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and
what is thi that ye say unto me, what aileth thee?  18:25 and the
children of dan said unto him, let not thi voic be heard among us,
lest angri fellow run upon thee, and thou lose thi life, with the
liv of thi household.

18:26 and the children of dan went their way: and when micah saw that
they were too strong for him, he turn and went back unto hi house.

18:27 and they took the thing which micah had made, and the priest
which he had, and came unto laish, unto a peopl that were at quiet
and secure: and they smote them with the edg of the sword, and burnt
th citi with fire.

18:28 and there wa no deliverer, becaus it wa far from zidon, and
they had no busi with ani man; and it wa in the valley that lieth
bi bethrehob. and they built a city, and dwelt therein.

18:29 and they call the name of the citi dan, after the name of dan
their father, who wa born unto israel: howbeit the name of the city
wa laish at the first.

18:30 and the children of dan set up the graven image: and jonathan,
th son of gershom, the son of manasseh, he and hi son were priests
to the tribe of dan until the day of the captiv of the land.

18:31 and they set them up micah' graven image, which he made, all
th time that the hous of god wa in shiloh.

19:1 and it came to pass in those days, when there wa no king in
israel, that there wa a certain levit sojourn on the side of
mount ephraim, who took to him a concubin out of bethlehemjudah.

19:2 and hi concubin play the whore against him, and went away
from him unto her father' hous to bethlehemjudah, and wa there four
whol months.

19:3 and her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendli unto
her, and to bring her again, have hi servant with him, and a couple
of asses: and she brought him into her father' house: and when the
fath of the damsel saw him, he rejoic to meet him.

19:4 and hi father in law, the damsel' father, retain him; and he
abod with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged
there.

19:5 and it came to pass on the fourth day, when they aros earli in
th morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel' father said
unto hi son in law, comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and
afterward go your way.

19:6 and they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together:
for the damsel' father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray
thee, and tarri all night, and let thine heart be merry.

19:7 and when the man rose up to depart, hi father in law urg him:
therefor he lodg there again.

19:8 and he aros earli in the morn on the fifth day to depart; and
th damsel' father said, comfort thine heart, I pray thee. and they
tarri until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.

19:9 and when the man rose up to depart, he, and hi concubine, and
hi servant, hi father in law, the damsel' father, said unto him,
behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarri all
night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodg here, that thine heart
may be merry; and to morrow get you earli on your way, that thou
mayest go home.

19:10 but the man would not tarri that night, but he rose up and
departed, and came over against jebus, which is jerusalem; and there
wer with him two ass saddled, hi concubin also wa with him.

19:11 and when they were by jebus, the day wa far spent; and the
serv said unto hi master, come, I pray thee, and let us turn in
into thi citi of the jebusites, and lodg in it.

19:12 and hi master said unto him, We will not turn asid hither into
th citi of a stranger, that is not of the children of israel; we will
pass over to gibeah.

19:13 and he said unto hi servant, come, and let us draw near to one
of these place to lodg all night, in gibeah, or in ramah.

19:14 and they pass on and went their way; and the sun went down
upon them when they were by gibeah, which belongeth to benjamin.

19:15 and they turn asid thither, to go in and to lodg in gibeah:
and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for
ther wa no man that took them into hi hous to lodging.

19:16 and, behold, there came an old man from hi work out of the
field at even, which wa also of mount ephraim; and he sojourn in
gibeah: but the men of the place were benjamites.

19:17 and when he had lift up hi eyes, he saw a wayfar man in
th street of the city: and the old man said, whither goest thou? and
whenc comest thou?  19:18 and he said unto him, We are pass from
bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount ephraim; from thenc am I: and
i went to bethlehemjudah, but I am now go to the hous of the lord;
and there is no man that receiveth me to house.

19:19 yet there is both straw and provend for our asses; and there
i bread and wine also for me, and for thi handmaid, and for the young
man which is with thi servants: there is no want of ani thing.

19:20 and the old man said, peac be with thee; howsoev let all thy
want lie upon me; onli lodg not in the street.

19:21 So he brought him into hi house, and gave provend unto the
asses: and they wash their feet, and did eat and drink.

19:22 now as they were make their heart merry, behold, the men of
th city, certain son of belial, beset the hous round about, and
beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man,
saying, bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may
know him.

19:23 and the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and
said unto them, nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly;
se that thi man is come into mine house, do not thi folly.

19:24 behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and hi concubine; them i
wil bring out now, and humbl ye them, and do with them what seemeth
good unto you: but unto thi man do not so vile a thing.

19:25 but the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his
concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and
abus her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to
spring, they let her go.

19:26 then came the woman in the dawn of the day, and fell down at
th door of the man' hous where her lord was, till it wa light.

19:27 and her lord rose up in the morning, and open the door of the
house, and went out to go hi way: and, behold, the woman his
concubin wa fallen down at the door of the house, and her hand were
upon the threshold.

19:28 and he said unto her, up, and let us be going. but none
answered.

then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him
unto hi place.

19:29 and when he wa come into hi house, he took a knife, and laid
hold on hi concubine, and divid her, togeth with her bones, into
twelv pieces, and sent her into all the coast of israel.

19:30 and it wa so, that all that saw it said, there wa no such deed
don nor seen from the day that the children of israel came up out of
th land of egypt unto thi day: consid of it, take advice, and
speak your minds.

20:1 then all the children of israel went out, and the congregation
wa gather togeth as one man, from dan even to beersheba, with the
land of gilead, unto the lord in mizpeh.

20:2 and the chief of all the people, even of all the tribe of
israel, present themselv in the assembl of the peopl of god,
four hundr thousand footmen that drew sword.

20:3 (now the children of benjamin heard that the children of israel
wer gone up to mizpeh.) then said the children of israel, tell us,
how wa thi wickedness?  20:4 and the levite, the husband of the
woman that wa slain, answer and said, I came into gibeah that
belongeth to benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.

20:5 and the men of gibeah rose against me, and beset the hous round
about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine
hav they forced, that she is dead.

20:6 and I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her
throughout all the countri of the inherit of israel: for they have
commit lewd and folli in israel.

20:7 behold, ye are all children of israel; give here your advic and
counsel.

20:8 and all the peopl aros as one man, saying, We will not ani of
u go to hi tent, neither will we ani of us turn into hi house.

20:9 but now thi shall be the thing which we will do to gibeah; we
wil go up by lot against it; 20:10 and we will take ten men of an
hundr throughout all the tribe of israel, and an hundr of a
thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the
people, that they may do, when they come to gibeah of benjamin,
accord to all the folli that they have wrought in israel.

20:11 So all the men of israel were gather against the city, knit
togeth as one man.

20:12 and the tribe of israel sent men through all the tribe of
benjamin, saying, what wicked is thi that is done among you?
20:13 now therefor deliv us the men, the children of belial, which
ar in gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from
israel. but the children of benjamin would not hearken to the voic of
their brethren the children of israel.

20:14 but the children of benjamin gather themselv togeth out of
th citi unto gibeah, to go out to battl against the children of
israel.

20:15 and the children of benjamin were number at that time out of
th citi twenti and six thousand men that drew sword, besid the
inhabit of gibeah, which were number seven hundr chosen men.

20:16 among all thi peopl there were seven hundr chosen men
lefthanded; everi one could sling stone at an hair breadth, and not
miss.

20:17 and the men of israel, besid benjamin, were number four
hundr thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.

20:18 and the children of israel arose, and went up to the hous of
god, and ask counsel of god, and said, which of us shall go up first
to the battl against the children of benjamin? and the lord said,
judah shall go up first.

20:19 and the children of israel rose up in the morning, and encamped
against gibeah.

20:20 and the men of israel went out to battl against benjamin; and
th men of israel put themselv in array to fight against them at
gibeah.

20:21 and the children of benjamin came forth out of gibeah, and
destroy down to the ground of the israelit that day twenti and two
thousand men.

20:22 and the peopl the men of israel encourag themselves, and set
their battl again in array in the place where they put themselv in
array the first day.

20:23 (and the children of israel went up and wept befor the lord
until even, and ask counsel of the lord, saying, shall I go up again
to battl against the children of benjamin my brother? and the lord
said, Go up against him.)  20:24 and the children of israel came near
against the children of benjamin the second day.

20:25 and benjamin went forth against them out of gibeah the second
day, and destroy down to the ground of the children of israel again
eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

20:26 then all the children of israel, and all the people, went up,
and came unto the hous of god, and wept, and sat there befor the
lord, and fast that day until even, and offer burnt offer and
peac offer befor the lord.

20:27 and the children of israel enquir of the lord, (for the ark of
th coven of god wa there in those days, 20:28 and phinehas, the
son of eleazar, the son of aaron, stood befor it in those days,)
saying, shall I yet again go out to battl against the children of
benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? and the lord said, Go up; for
to morrow I will deliv them into thine hand.

20:29 and israel set lier in wait round about gibeah.

20:30 and the children of israel went up against the children of
benjamin on the third day, and put themselv in array against gibeah,
a at other times.

20:31 and the children of benjamin went out against the people, and
wer drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people,
and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to
th hous of god, and the other to gibeah in the field, about thirty
men of israel.

20:32 and the children of benjamin said, they are smitten down before
us, as at the first. but the children of israel said, let us flee, and
draw them from the citi unto the highways.

20:33 and all the men of israel rose up out of their place, and put
themselv in array at baaltamar: and the lier in wait of israel came
forth out of their places, even out of the meadow of gibeah.

20:34 and there came against gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
israel, and the battl wa sore: but they knew not that evil wa near
them.

20:35 and the lord smote benjamin befor israel: and the children of
israel destroy of the benjamit that day twenti and five thousand
and an hundr men: all these drew the sword.

20:36 So the children of benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the
men of israel gave place to the benjamites, becaus they trust unto
th lier in wait which they had set besid gibeah.

20:37 and the lier in wait hasted, and rush upon gibeah; and the
lier in wait drew themselv along, and smote all the citi with the
edg of the sword.

20:38 now there wa an appoint sign between the men of israel and
th lier in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise
up out of the city.

20:39 and when the men of israel retir in the battle, benjamin began
to smite and kill of the men of israel about thirti persons: for they
said, sure they are smitten down befor us, as in the first battle.

20:40 but when the flame began to aris up out of the citi with a
pillar of smoke, the benjamit look behind them, and, behold, the
flam of the citi ascend up to heaven.

20:41 and when the men of israel turn again, the men of benjamin
wer amazed: for they saw that evil wa come upon them.

20:42 therefor they turn their back befor the men of israel unto
th way of the wilderness; but the battl overtook them; and them
which came out of the citi they destroy in the midst of them.

20:43 thu they inclos the benjamit round about, and chase them,
and trode them down with eas over against gibeah toward the
sunrising.

20:44 and there fell of benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were
men of valour.

20:45 and they turn and fled toward the wilder unto the rock of
rimmon: and they glean of them in the highway five thousand men;
and pursu hard after them unto gidom, and slew two thousand men of
them.

20:46 So that all which fell that day of benjamin were twenti and five
thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.

20:47 but six hundr men turn and fled to the wilder unto the
rock rimmon, and abod in the rock rimmon four months.

20:48 and the men of israel turn again upon the children of
benjamin, and smote them with the edg of the sword, as well the men
of everi city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set
on fire all the citi that they came to.

21:1 now the men of israel had sworn in mizpeh, saying, there shall
not ani of us give hi daughter unto benjamin to wife.

21:2 and the peopl came to the hous of god, and abod there till
even befor god, and lift up their voices, and wept sore; 21:3 and
said, O lord god of israel, whi is thi come to pass in israel, that
ther should be to day one tribe lack in israel?  21:4 and it came
to pass on the morrow, that the peopl rose early, and built there an
altar, and offer burnt offer and peac offerings.

21:5 and the children of israel said, who is there among all the
trib of israel that came not up with the congreg unto the lord?
for they had made a great oath concern him that came not up to the
lord to mizpeh, saying, He shall sure be put to death.

21:6 and the children of israel repent them for benjamin their
brother, and said, there is one tribe cut off from israel thi day.

21:7 how shall we do for wive for them that remain, see we have
sworn by the lord that we will not give them of our daughter to
wives?  21:8 and they said, what one is there of the tribe of israel
that came not up to mizpeh to the lord? and, behold, there came none
to the camp from jabeshgilead to the assembly.

21:9 for the peopl were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the
inhabit of jabeshgilead there.

21:10 and the congreg sent thither twelv thousand men of the
valiantest, and command them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants
of jabeshgilead with the edg of the sword, with the women and the
children.

21:11 and thi is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterli destroy
everi male, and everi woman that hath lain by man.

21:12 and they found among the inhabit of jabeshgilead four
hundr young virgins, that had known no man by lie with ani male:
and they brought them unto the camp to shiloh, which is in the land of
canaan.

21:13 and the whole congreg sent some to speak to the children of
benjamin that were in the rock rimmon, and to call peaceabl unto
them.

21:14 and benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives
which they had save aliv of the women of jabeshgilead: and yet so
they suffic them not.

21:15 and the peopl repent them for benjamin, becaus that the lord
had made a breach in the tribe of israel.

21:16 then the elder of the congreg said, how shall we do for
wiv for them that remain, see the women are destroy out of
benjamin?  21:17 and they said, there must be an inherit for them
that be escap of benjamin, that a tribe be not destroy out of
israel.

21:18 howbeit we may not give them wive of our daughters: for the
children of israel have sworn, saying, curs be he that giveth a wife
to benjamin.

21:19 then they said, behold, there is a feast of the lord in shiloh
yearli in a place which is on the north side of bethel, on the east
sid of the highway that goeth up from bethel to shechem, and on the
south of lebonah.

21:20 therefor they command the children of benjamin, saying, go
and lie in wait in the vineyards; 21:21 and see, and, behold, if the
daught of shiloh come out to danc in dances, then come ye out of
th vineyards, and catch you everi man hi wife of the daughter of
shiloh, and go to the land of benjamin.

21:22 and it shall be, when their father or their brethren come unto
u to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favour unto them
for our sakes: becaus we reserv not to each man hi wife in the
war: for ye did not give unto them at thi time, that ye should be
guilty.

21:23 and the children of benjamin did so, and took them wives,
accord to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and
they went and return unto their inheritance, and repair the
cities, and dwelt in them.

21:24 and the children of israel depart thenc at that time, every
man to hi tribe and to hi family, and they went out from thence
everi man to hi inheritance.

21:25 In those day there wa no king in israel: everi man did that
which wa right in hi own eyes.




th book of ruth


1:1 now it came to pass in the day when the judg ruled, that there
wa a famin in the land. and a certain man of bethlehemjudah went to
sojourn in the countri of moab, he, and hi wife, and hi two sons.

1:2 and the name of the man wa elimelech, and the name of hi wife
naomi, and the name of hi two son mahlon and chilion, ephrathit of
bethlehemjudah. and they came into the countri of moab, and continued
there.

1:3 and elimelech naomi' husband died; and she wa left, and her two
sons.

1:4 and they took them wive of the women of moab; the name of the one
wa orpah, and the name of the other ruth: and they dwell there
about ten years.

1:5 and mahlon and chilion die also both of them; and the woman was
left of her two son and her husband.

1:6 then she aros with her daughter in law, that she might return
from the countri of moab: for she had heard in the countri of moab how
that the lord had visit hi peopl in give them bread.

1:7 wherefor she went forth out of the place where she was, and her
two daughter in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto
th land of judah.

1:8 and naomi said unto her two daughter in law, go, return each to
her mother' house: the lord deal kindli with you, as ye have dealt
with the dead, and with me.

1:9 the lord grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house
of her husband. then she kiss them; and they lift up their voice,
and wept.

1:10 and they said unto her, sure we will return with thee unto thy
people.

1:11 and naomi said, turn again, my daughters: whi will ye go with me?
ar there yet ani more son in my womb, that they may be your
husbands?  1:12 turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too
old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have
an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; 1:13 would ye
tarri for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from
hav husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your
sak that the hand of the lord is gone out against me.

1:14 and they lift up their voice, and wept again: and orpah kissed
h mother in law; but ruth clave unto her.

1:15 and she said, behold, thi sister in law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods: return thou after thi sister in law.

1:16 and ruth said, intreat me not to leav thee, or to return from
follow after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where
th lodgest, I will lodge: thi peopl shall be my people, and thi god
mi god: 1:17 where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried:
th lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me.

1:18 when she saw that she wa stedfastli mind to go with her, then
sh left speak unto her.

1:19 So they two went until they came to bethlehem. and it came to
pass, when they were come to bethlehem, that all the citi wa moved
about them, and they said, Is thi naomi?  1:20 and she said unto
them, call me not naomi, call me mara: for the almighti hath dealt
veri bitterli with me.

1:21 I went out full and the lord hath brought me home again empty:
whi then call ye me naomi, see the lord hath testifi against me,
and the almighti hath afflict me?  1:22 So naomi returned, and ruth
th moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which return out of
th countri of moab: and they came to bethlehem in the begin of
barley harvest.

2:1 and naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighti man of wealth,
of the famili of elimelech; and hi name wa boaz.

2:2 and ruth the moabitess said unto naomi, let me now go to the
field, and glean ear of corn after him in whose sight I shall find
grace.

and she said unto her, go, my daughter.

2:3 and she went, and came, and glean in the field after the
reapers: and her hap wa to light on a part of the field belonging
unto boaz, who wa of the kindr of elimelech.

2:4 and, behold, boaz came from bethlehem, and said unto the reapers,
th lord be with you. and they answer him, the lord bless thee.

2:5 then said boaz unto hi servant that wa set over the reapers,
whos damsel is this?  2:6 and the servant that wa set over the
reap answer and said, It is the moabitish damsel that came back
with naomi out of the countri of moab: 2:7 and she said, I pray you,
let me glean and gather after the reaper among the sheaves: so she
came, and hath continu even from the morn until now, that she
tarri a littl in the house.

2:8 then said boaz unto ruth, hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to
glean in anoth field, neither go from hence, but abid here fast by
mi maidens: 2:9 let thine eye be on the field that they do reap, and
go thou after them: have I not charg the young men that they shall
not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and
drink of that which the young men have drawn.

2:10 then she fell on her face, and bow herself to the ground, and
said unto him, whi have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou
shouldest take knowledg of me, see I am a stranger?  2:11 and boaz
answ and said unto her, It hath fulli been shew me, all that
thou hast done unto thi mother in law sinc the death of thine
husband: and how thou hast left thi father and thi mother, and the
land of thi nativity, and art come unto a peopl which thou knewest
not heretofore.

2:12 the lord recompens thi work, and a full reward be given thee of
th lord god of israel, under whose wing thou art come to trust.

2:13 then she said, let me find favour in thi sight, my lord; for that
thou hast comfort me, and for that thou hast spoken friendli unto
thin handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.

2:14 and boaz said unto her, At mealtim come thou hither, and eat of
th bread, and dip thi morsel in the vinegar. and she sat besid the
reapers: and he reach her parch corn, and she did eat, and was
sufficed, and left.

2:15 and when she wa risen up to glean, boaz command hi young men,
saying, let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:
2:16 and let fall also some of the hand of purpos for her, and
leav them, that she may glean them, and rebuk her not.

2:17 So she glean in the field until even, and beat out that she had
gleaned: and it wa about an ephah of barley.

2:18 and she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law
saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that
sh had reserv after she wa sufficed.

2:19 and her mother in law said unto her, where hast thou glean to
day?  and where wroughtest thou? bless be he that did take knowledge
of thee. and she shew her mother in law with whom she had wrought,
and said, the man' name with whom I wrought to day is boaz.

2:20 and naomi said unto her daughter in law, bless be he of the
lord, who hath not left off hi kind to the live and to the
dead. and naomi said unto her, the man is near of kin unto us, one of
our next kinsmen.

2:21 and ruth the moabitess said, He said unto me also, thou shalt
keep fast by my young men, until they have end all my harvest.

2:22 and naomi said unto ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my
daughter, that thou go out with hi maidens, that they meet thee not
in ani other field.

2:23 So she kept fast by the maiden of boaz to glean unto the end of
barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.

3:1 then naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall i
not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?  3:2 and now is
not boaz of our kindred, with whose maiden thou wast?  behold, he
winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.

3:3 wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thi raiment upon
thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto
th man, until he shall have done eat and drinking.

3:4 and it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the
plac where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncov hi feet,
and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.

3:5 and she said unto her, all that thou sayest unto me I will do.

3:6 and she went down unto the floor, and did accord to all that
her mother in law bade her.

3:7 and when boaz had eaten and drunk, and hi heart wa merry, he
went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly,
and uncov hi feet, and laid her down.

3:8 and it came to pass at midnight, that the man wa afraid, and
turn himself: and, behold, a woman lay at hi feet.

3:9 and he said, who art thou? and she answered, I am ruth thine
handmaid: spread therefor thi skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art
a near kinsman.

3:10 and he said, bless be thou of the lord, my daughter: for thou
hast shew more kind in the latter end than at the beginning,
inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.

3:11 and now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou
requirest: for all the citi of my peopl doth know that thou art a
virtu woman.

3:12 and now it is true that I am thi near kinsman: howbeit there is a
kinsman nearer than i.

3:13 tarri thi night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will
perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the
kinsman' part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee,
then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the lord liveth: lie
down until the morning.

3:14 and she lay at hi feet until the morning: and she rose up before
on could know another. and he said, let it not be known that a woman
cam into the floor.

3:15 also he said, bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold
it.

and when she held it, he measur six measur of barley, and laid it
on her: and she went into the city.

3:16 and when she came to her mother in law, she said, who art thou,
mi daughter? and she told her all that the man had done to her.

3:17 and she said, these six measur of barley gave he me; for he
said to me, Go not empti unto thi mother in law.

3:18 then said she, sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the
matt will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have
finish the thing thi day.

4:1 then went boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and,
behold, the kinsman of whom boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, ho,
such a one! turn aside, sit down here. and he turn aside, and sat
down.

4:2 and he took ten men of the elder of the city, and said, sit ye
down here. and they sat down.

4:3 and he said unto the kinsman, naomi, that is come again out of the
countri of moab, selleth a parcel of land, which wa our brother
elimelech's: 4:4 and I thought to advertis thee, saying, buy it
befor the inhabitants, and befor the elder of my people. If thou
wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell
me, that I may know: for there is none to redeem it besid thee; and i
am after thee. and he said, I will redeem it.

4:5 then said boaz, what day thou buyest the field of the hand of
naomi, thou must buy it also of ruth the moabitess, the wife of the
dead, to rais up the name of the dead upon hi inheritance.

4:6 and the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar
min own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot
redeem it.

4:7 now thi wa the manner in former time in israel concerning
redeem and concern changing, for to confirm all things; a man
pluck off hi shoe, and gave it to hi neighbour: and thi wa a
testimoni in israel.

4:8 therefor the kinsman said unto boaz, buy it for thee. So he drew
off hi shoe.

4:9 and boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are
wit thi day, that I have bought all that wa elimelech's, and
al that wa chilion' and mahlon's, of the hand of naomi.

4:10 moreov ruth the moabitess, the wife of mahlon, have I purchased
to be my wife, to rais up the name of the dead upon hi inheritance,
that the name of the dead be not cut off from among hi brethren, and
from the gate of hi place: ye are wit thi day.

4:11 and all the peopl that were in the gate, and the elders, said,
w are witnesses. the lord make the woman that is come into thine
hous like rachel and like leah, which two did build the hous of
israel: and do thou worthili in ephratah, and be famou in bethlehem:
4:12 and let thi hous be like the hous of pharez, whom tamar bare
unto judah, of the seed which the lord shall give thee of thi young
woman.

4:13 So boaz took ruth, and she wa hi wife: and when he went in unto
her, the lord gave her conception, and she bare a son.

4:14 and the women said unto naomi, bless be the lord, which hath
not left thee thi day without a kinsman, that hi name may be famous
in israel.

4:15 and he shall be unto thee a restor of thi life, and a nourisher
of thine old age: for thi daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is
bett to thee than seven sons, hath born him.

4:16 and naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became
nurs unto it.

4:17 and the women her neighbour gave it a name, saying, there is a
son born to naomi; and they call hi name obed: he is the father of
jesse, the father of david.

4:18 now these are the gener of pharez: pharez begat hezron,
4:19 and hezron begat ram, and ram begat amminadab, 4:20 and amminadab
begat nahshon, and nahshon begat salmon, 4:21 and salmon begat boaz,
and boaz begat obed, 4:22 and obe begat jesse, and jess begat david.




th first book of samuel

otherwis called:

th first book of the kings


1:1 now there wa a certain man of ramathaimzophim, of mount ephraim,
and hi name wa elkanah, the son of jeroham, the son of elihu, the
son of tohu, the son of zuph, an ephrathite: 1:2 and he had two wives;
th name of the one wa hannah, and the name of the other peninnah:
and peninnah had children, but hannah had no children.

1:3 and thi man went up out of hi citi yearli to worship and to
sacrific unto the lord of host in shiloh. and the two son of eli,
hophni and phinehas, the priest of the lord, were there.

1:4 and when the time wa that elkanah offered, he gave to peninnah
hi wife, and to all her son and her daughters, portions: 1:5 but
unto hannah he gave a worthi portion; for he love hannah: but the
lord had shut up her womb.

1:6 and her adversari also provok her sore, for to make her fret,
becaus the lord had shut up her womb.

1:7 and as he did so year by year, when she went up to the hous of
th lord, so she provok her; therefor she wept, and did not eat.

1:8 then said elkanah her husband to her, hannah, whi weepest thou?
and whi eatest thou not? and whi is thi heart grieved? am not I better
to thee than ten sons?  1:9 So hannah rose up after they had eaten in
shiloh, and after they had drunk. now eli the priest sat upon a seat
bi a post of the templ of the lord.

1:10 and she wa in bitter of soul, and pray unto the lord, and
wept sore.

1:11 and she vow a vow, and said, O lord of hosts, if thou wilt
inde look on the afflict of thine handmaid, and rememb me, and
not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man
child, then I will give him unto the lord all the day of hi life,
and there shall no razor come upon hi head.

1:12 and it came to pass, as she continu pray befor the lord,
that eli mark her mouth.

1:13 now hannah, she spake in her heart; onli her lip moved, but her
voic wa not heard: therefor eli thought she had been drunken.

1:14 and eli said unto her, how long wilt thou be drunken? put away
thi wine from thee.

1:15 and hannah answer and said, no, my lord, I am a woman of a
sorrow spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
pour out my soul befor the lord.

1:16 count not thine handmaid for a daughter of belial: for out of the
abund of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.

1:17 then eli answer and said, Go in peace: and the god of israel
gr thee thi petit that thou hast ask of him.

1:18 and she said, let thine handmaid find grace in thi sight. So the
woman went her way, and did eat, and her counten wa no more sad.

1:19 and they rose up in the morn early, and worship befor the
lord, and returned, and came to their hous to ramah: and elkanah knew
hannah hi wife; and the lord rememb her.

1:20 wherefor it came to pass, when the time wa come about after
hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and call hi name samuel,
saying, becaus I have ask him of the lord.

1:21 and the man elkanah, and all hi house, went up to offer unto the
lord the yearli sacrifice, and hi vow.

1:22 but hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not
go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he
may appear befor the lord, and there abid for ever.

1:23 and elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good;
tarri until thou have wean him; onli the lord establish hi word. so
th woman abode, and gave her son suck until she wean him.

1:24 and when she had wean him, she took him up with her, with three
bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottl of wine, and brought
him unto the hous of the lord in shiloh: and the child wa young.

1:25 and they slew a bullock, and brought the child to eli.

1:26 and she said, Oh my lord, as thi soul liveth, my lord, I am the
woman that stood by thee here, pray unto the lord.

1:27 for thi child I prayed; and the lord hath given me my petition
which I ask of him: 1:28 therefor also I have lent him to the lord;
a long as he liveth he shall be lent to the lord. and he worshipped
th lord there.

2:1 and hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the lord, mine
horn is exalt in the lord: my mouth is enlarg over mine enemies;
becaus I rejoic in thi salvation.

2:2 there is none holi as the lord: for there is none besid thee:
neith is there ani rock like our god.

2:3 talk no more so exceed proudly; let not arrog come out of
your mouth: for the lord is a god of knowledge, and by him action are
weighed.

2:4 the bow of the mighti men are broken, and they that stumbl are
gird with strength.

2:5 they that were full have hire out themselv for bread; and they
that were hungri ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she
that hath mani children is wax feeble.

2:6 the lord killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave,
and bringeth up.

2:7 the lord maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and
lifteth up.

2:8 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar
from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit
th throne of glory: for the pillar of the earth are the lord's, and
h hath set the world upon them.

2:9 He will keep the feet of hi saints, and the wick shall be
sil in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.

2:10 the adversari of the lord shall be broken to pieces; out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them: the lord shall judg the end of
th earth; and he shall give strength unto hi king, and exalt the
horn of hi anointed.

2:11 and elkanah went to ramah to hi house. and the child did
minist unto the lord befor eli the priest.

2:12 now the son of eli were son of belial; they knew not the lord.

2:13 and the priest' custom with the peopl was, that, when ani man
off sacrifice, the priest' servant came, while the flesh wa in
seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in hi hand; 2:14 and he
struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the
fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in
shiloh unto all the israelit that came thither.

2:15 also befor they burnt the fat, the priest' servant came, and
said to the man that sacrificed, give flesh to roast for the priest;
for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

2:16 and if ani man said unto him, let them not fail to burn the fat
presently, and then take as much as thi soul desireth; then he would
answ him, nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will
tak it by force.

2:17 wherefor the sin of the young men wa veri great befor the
lord: for men abhor the offer of the lord.

2:18 but samuel minist befor the lord, be a child, gird with
a linen ephod.

2:19 moreov hi mother made him a littl coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the
yearli sacrifice.

2:20 and eli bless elkanah and hi wife, and said, the lord give
the seed of thi woman for the loan which is lent to the lord. and
they went unto their own home.

2:21 and the lord visit hannah, so that she conceived, and bare
thre son and two daughters. and the child samuel grew befor the
lord.

2:22 now eli wa veri old, and heard all that hi son did unto all
israel; and how they lay with the women that assembl at the door of
th tabernacl of the congregation.

2:23 and he said unto them, whi do ye such things? for I hear of your
evil deal by all thi people.

2:24 nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the
lord' peopl to transgress.

2:25 If one man sin against another, the judg shall judg him: but if
a man sin against the lord, who shall intreat for him? notwithstanding
they hearken not unto the voic of their father, becaus the lord
would slay them.

2:26 and the child samuel grew on, and wa in favour both with the
lord, and also with men.

2:27 and there came a man of god unto eli, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord, did I plainli appear unto the hous of thi father,
when they were in egypt in pharaoh' house?  2:28 and did I choos him
out of all the tribe of israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine
altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod befor me? and did I give
unto the hous of thi father all the offer made by fire of the
children of israel?  2:29 wherefor kick ye at my sacrific and at
min offering, which I have command in my habitation; and honourest
thi son abov me, to make yourselv fat with the chiefest of all the
off of israel my people?  2:30 wherefor the lord god of israel
saith, I said inde that thi house, and the hous of thi father,
should walk befor me for ever: but now the lord saith, Be it far from
me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despis me
shal be lightli esteemed.

2:31 behold, the day come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm
of thi father' house, that there shall not be an old man in thine
house.

2:32 and thou shalt see an enemi in my habitation, in all the wealth
which god shall give israel: and there shall not be an old man in
thin hous for ever.

2:33 and the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar,
shal be to consum thine eyes, and to griev thine heart: and all the
increas of thine hous shall die in the flower of their age.

2:34 and thi shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thi two
sons, on hophni and phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.

2:35 and I will rais me up a faith priest, that shall do according
to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a
sur house; and he shall walk befor mine anoint for ever.

2:36 and it shall come to pass, that everi one that is left in thine
hous shall come and crouch to him for a piec of silver and a morsel
of bread, and shall say, put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests'
offices, that I may eat a piec of bread.

3:1 and the child samuel minist unto the lord befor eli. and the
word of the lord wa preciou in those days; there wa no open vision.

3:2 and it came to pass at that time, when eli wa laid down in his
place, and hi eye began to wax dim, that he could not see; 3:3 and
er the lamp of god went out in the templ of the lord, where the ark
of god was, and samuel wa laid down to sleep; 3:4 that the lord
cal samuel: and he answered, here am i.

3:5 and he ran unto eli, and said, here am I; for thou calledst me.
and he said, I call not; lie down again. and he went and lay down.

3:6 and the lord call yet again, samuel. and samuel aros and went
to eli, and said, here am I; for thou didst call me. and he answered,
i call not, my son; lie down again.

3:7 now samuel did not yet know the lord, neither wa the word of the
lord yet reveal unto him.

3:8 and the lord call samuel again the third time. and he aros and
went to eli, and said, here am I; for thou didst call me. and eli
perceiv that the lord had call the child.

3:9 therefor eli said unto samuel, go, lie down: and it shall be, if
h call thee, that thou shalt say, speak, lord; for thi servant
heareth. So samuel went and lay down in hi place.

3:10 and the lord came, and stood, and call as at other times,
samuel, samuel. then samuel answered, speak; for thi servant heareth.

3:11 and the lord said to samuel, behold, I will do a thing in israel,
at which both the ear of everi one that heareth it shall tingle.

3:12 In that day I will perform against eli all thing which I have
spoken concern hi house: when I begin, I will also make an end.

3:13 for I have told him that I will judg hi hous for ever for the
iniqu which he knoweth; becaus hi son made themselv vile, and
h restrain them not.

3:14 and therefor I have sworn unto the hous of eli, that the
iniqu of eli' hous shall not be purg with sacrific nor
off for ever.

3:15 and samuel lay until the morning, and open the door of the
hous of the lord. and samuel fear to shew eli the vision.

3:16 then eli call samuel, and said, samuel, my son. and he
answered, here am i.

3:17 and he said, what is the thing that the lord hath said unto thee?
i pray thee hide it not from me: god do so to thee, and more also, if
thou hide ani thing from me of all the thing that he said unto thee.

3:18 and samuel told him everi whit, and hid noth from him. and he
said, It is the lord: let him do what seemeth him good.

3:19 and samuel grew, and the lord wa with him, and did let none of
hi word fall to the ground.

3:20 and all israel from dan even to beersheba knew that samuel was
establish to be a prophet of the lord.

3:21 and the lord appear again in shiloh: for the lord revealed
himself to samuel in shiloh by the word of the lord.

4:1 and the word of samuel came to all israel. now israel went out
against the philistin to battle, and pitch besid ebenezer: and
th philistin pitch in aphek.

4:2 and the philistin put themselv in array against israel: and
when they join battle, israel wa smitten befor the philistines:
and they slew of the armi in the field about four thousand men.

4:3 and when the peopl were come into the camp, the elder of israel
said, wherefor hath the lord smitten us to day befor the
philistines? let us fetch the ark of the coven of the lord out of
shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of
th hand of our enemies.

4:4 So the peopl sent to shiloh, that they might bring from thence
th ark of the coven of the lord of hosts, which dwelleth between
th cherubims: and the two son of eli, hophni and phinehas, were
ther with the ark of the coven of god.

4:5 and when the ark of the coven of the lord came into the camp,
al israel shout with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.

4:6 and when the philistin heard the nois of the shout, they said,
what meaneth the nois of thi great shout in the camp of the hebrews?
and they understood that the ark of the lord wa come into the camp.

4:7 and the philistin were afraid, for they said, god is come into
th camp. and they said, woe unto us! for there hath not been such a
th heretofore.

4:8 woe unto us! who shall deliv us out of the hand of these mighty
gods? these are the god that smote the egyptian with all the plagues
in the wilderness.

4:9 Be strong and quit yourselv like men, O ye philistines, that ye
b not servant unto the hebrews, as they have been to you: quit
yourselv like men, and fight.

4:10 and the philistin fought, and israel wa smitten, and they fled
everi man into hi tent: and there wa a veri great slaughter; for
ther fell of israel thirti thousand footmen.

4:11 and the ark of god wa taken; and the two son of eli, hophni and
phinehas, were slain.

4:12 and there ran a man of benjamin out of the army, and came to
shiloh the same day with hi cloth rent, and with earth upon his
head.

4:13 and when he came, lo, eli sat upon a seat by the wayside
watching: for hi heart trembl for the ark of god. and when the man
cam into the city, and told it, all the citi cri out.

4:14 and when eli heard the nois of the crying, he said, what meaneth
th nois of thi tumult? and the man came in hastily, and told eli.

4:15 now eli wa nineti and eight year old; and hi eye were dim,
that he could not see.

4:16 and the man said unto eli, I am he that came out of the army, and
i fled to day out of the army. and he said, what is there done, my
son?  4:17 and the messeng answer and said, israel is fled before
th philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the
people, and thi two son also, hophni and phinehas, are dead, and the
ark of god is taken.

4:18 and it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of god, that
h fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his
neck brake, and he died: for he wa an old man, and heavy. and he had
judg israel forti years.

4:19 and hi daughter in law, phinehas' wife, wa with child, near to
b delivered: and when she heard the tide that the ark of god was
taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed
herself and travailed; for her pain came upon her.

4:20 and about the time of her death the women that stood by her said
unto her, fear not; for thou hast born a son. but she answer not,
neith did she regard it.

4:21 and she name the child ichabod, saying, the glori is departed
from israel: becaus the ark of god wa taken, and becaus of her
fath in law and her husband.

4:22 and she said, the glori is depart from israel: for the ark of
god is taken.

5:1 and the philistin took the ark of god, and brought it from
ebenez unto ashdod.

5:2 when the philistin took the ark of god, they brought it into the
hous of dagon, and set it by dagon.

5:3 and when they of ashdod aros earli on the morrow, behold, dagon
wa fallen upon hi face to the earth befor the ark of the lord. and
they took dagon, and set him in hi place again.

5:4 and when they aros earli on the morrow morning, behold, dagon was
fallen upon hi face to the ground befor the ark of the lord; and the
head of dagon and both the palm of hi hand were cut off upon the
threshold; onli the stump of dagon wa left to him.

5:5 therefor neither the priest of dagon, nor ani that come into
dagon' house, tread on the threshold of dagon in ashdod unto this
day.

5:6 but the hand of the lord wa heavi upon them of ashdod, and he
destroy them, and smote them with emerods, even ashdod and the
coast thereof.

5:7 and when the men of ashdod saw that it wa so, they said, the ark
of the god of israel shall not abid with us: for hi hand is sore
upon us, and upon dagon our god.

5:8 they sent therefor and gather all the lord of the philistines
unto them, and said, what shall we do with the ark of the god of
israel? and they answered, let the ark of the god of israel be carried
about unto gath. and they carri the ark of the god of israel about
thither.

5:9 and it wa so, that, after they had carri it about, the hand of
th lord wa against the citi with a veri great destruction: and he
smot the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods
in their secret parts.

5:10 therefor they sent the ark of god to ekron. and it came to pass,
a the ark of god came to ekron, that the ekronit cri out, saying,
they have brought about the ark of the god of israel to us, to slay us
and our people.

5:11 So they sent and gather togeth all the lord of the
philistines, and said, send away the ark of the god of israel, and let
it go again to hi own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for
ther wa a deadli destruct throughout all the city; the hand of
god wa veri heavi there.

5:12 and the men that die not were smitten with the emerods: and the
cri of the citi went up to heaven.

6:1 and the ark of the lord wa in the countri of the philistines
seven months.

6:2 and the philistin call for the priest and the diviners,
saying, what shall we do to the ark of the lord? tell us wherewith we
shal send it to hi place.

6:3 and they said, If ye send away the ark of the god of israel, send
it not empty; but in ani wise return him a trespass offering: then ye
shal be healed, and it shall be known to you whi hi hand is not
remov from you.

6:4 then said they, what shall be the trespass offer which we shall
return to him? they answered, five golden emerods, and five golden
mice, accord to the number of the lord of the philistines: for one
plagu wa on you all, and on your lords.

6:5 wherefor ye shall make imag of your emerods, and imag of your
mic that mar the land; and ye shall give glori unto the god of
israel: peradventur he will lighten hi hand from off you, and from
off your gods, and from off your land.

6:6 wherefor then do ye harden your hearts, as the egyptian and
pharaoh harden their hearts? when he had wrought wonder among
them, did they not let the peopl go, and they departed?  6:7 now
therefor make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there
hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their
calv home from them: 6:8 and take the ark of the lord, and lay it
upon the cart; and put the jewel of gold, which ye return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away,
that it may go.

6:9 and see, if it goeth up by the way of hi own coast to
bethshemesh, then he hath done us thi great evil: but if not, then we
shal know that it is not hi hand that smote us: it wa a chanc that
happen to us.

6:10 and the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tie them to the
cart, and shut up their calv at home: 6:11 and they laid the ark of
th lord upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the
imag of their emerods.

6:12 and the kine took the straight way to the way of bethshemesh, and
went along the highway, low as they went, and turn not asid to
th right hand or to the left; and the lord of the philistin went
aft them unto the border of bethshemesh.

6:13 and they of bethshemesh were reap their wheat harvest in the
valley: and they lift up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced
to see it.

6:14 and the cart came into the field of joshua, a bethshemite, and
stood there, where there wa a great stone: and they clave the wood of
th cart, and offer the kine a burnt offer unto the lord.

6:15 and the levit took down the ark of the lord, and the coffer
that wa with it, wherein the jewel of gold were, and put them on the
great stone: and the men of bethshemesh offer burnt offer and
sacrif sacrific the same day unto the lord.

6:16 and when the five lord of the philistin had seen it, they
return to ekron the same day.

6:17 and these are the golden emerod which the philistin returned
for a trespass offer unto the lord; for ashdod one, for gaza one,
for askelon one, for gath one, for ekron one; 6:18 and the golden
mice, accord to the number of all the citi of the philistines
belong to the five lords, both of fenc cities, and of country
villages, even unto the great stone of abel, whereon they set down the
ark of the lord: which stone remaineth unto thi day in the field of
joshua, the bethshemite.

6:19 and he smote the men of bethshemesh, becaus they had look into
th ark of the lord, even he smote of the peopl fifti thousand and
threescor and ten men: and the peopl lamented, becaus the lord had
smitten mani of the peopl with a great slaughter.

6:20 and the men of bethshemesh said, who is abl to stand befor this
holi lord god? and to whom shall he go up from us?  6:21 and they sent
messeng to the inhabit of kirjathjearim, saying, the
philistin have brought again the ark of the lord; come ye down, and
fetch it up to you.

7:1 and the men of kirjathjearim came, and fetch up the ark of the
lord, and brought it into the hous of abinadab in the hill, and
sanctifi eleazar hi son to keep the ark of the lord.

7:2 and it came to pass, while the ark abod in kirjathjearim, that
th time wa long; for it wa twenti years: and all the hous of
israel lament after the lord.

7:3 and samuel spake unto all the hous of israel, saying, If ye do
return unto the lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange
god and ashtaroth from among you, and prepar your heart unto the
lord, and serv him only: and he will deliv you out of the hand of
th philistines.

7:4 then the children of israel did put away baalim and ashtaroth, and
serv the lord only.

7:5 and samuel said, gather all israel to mizpeh, and I will pray for
you unto the lord.

7:6 and they gather togeth to mizpeh, and drew water, and poured
it out befor the lord, and fast on that day, and said there, we
hav sin against the lord. and samuel judg the children of israel
in mizpeh.

7:7 and when the philistin heard that the children of israel were
gath togeth to mizpeh, the lord of the philistin went up
against israel. and when the children of israel heard it, they were
afraid of the philistines.

7:8 and the children of israel said to samuel, ceas not to cri unto
th lord our god for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
philistines.

7:9 and samuel took a suck lamb, and offer it for a burnt
off wholli unto the lord: and samuel cri unto the lord for
israel; and the lord heard him.

7:10 and as samuel wa offer up the burnt offering, the philistines
drew near to battl against israel: but the lord thunder with a
great thunder on that day upon the philistines, and discomfit them;
and they were smitten befor israel.

7:11 and the men of israel went out of mizpeh, and pursu the
philistines, and smote them, until they came under bethcar.

7:12 then samuel took a stone, and set it between mizpeh and shen, and
cal the name of it ebenezer, saying, hitherto hath the lord helped
us.

7:13 So the philistin were subdued, and they came no more into the
coast of israel: and the hand of the lord wa against the philistines
al the day of samuel.

7:14 and the citi which the philistin had taken from israel were
restor to israel, from ekron even unto gath; and the coast thereof
did israel deliv out of the hand of the philistines. and there was
peac between israel and the amorites.

7:15 and samuel judg israel all the day of hi life.

7:16 and he went from year to year in circuit to bethel, and gilgal,
and mizpeh, and judg israel in all those places.

7:17 and hi return wa to ramah; for there wa hi house; and there
h judg israel; and there he built an altar unto the lord.

8:1 and it came to pass, when samuel wa old, that he made hi sons
judg over israel.

8:2 now the name of hi firstborn wa joel; and the name of his
second, abiah: they were judg in beersheba.

8:3 and hi son walk not in hi ways, but turn asid after lucre,
and took bribes, and pervert judgment.

8:4 then all the elder of israel gather themselv together, and
cam to samuel unto ramah, 8:5 and said unto him, behold, thou art
old, and thi son walk not in thi ways: now make us a king to judg us
lik all the nations.

8:6 but the thing displeas samuel, when they said, give us a king to
judg us. and samuel pray unto the lord.

8:7 and the lord said unto samuel, hearken unto the voic of the
peopl in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have reject me, that I should not reign over them.

8:8 accord to all the work which they have done sinc the day that
i brought them up out of egypt even unto thi day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and serv other gods, so do they also unto thee.

8:9 now therefor hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest
solemnli unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall
reign over them.

8:10 and samuel told all the word of the lord unto the peopl that
ask of him a king.

8:11 and he said, thi will be the manner of the king that shall reign
ov you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for
hi chariots, and to be hi horsemen; and some shall run befor his
chariots.

8:12 and he will appoint him captain over thousands, and captains
ov fifties; and will set them to ear hi ground, and to reap his
harvest, and to make hi instrument of war, and instrument of his
chariots.

8:13 and he will take your daughter to be confectionaries, and to be
cooks, and to be bakers.

8:14 and he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your
oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to hi servants.

8:15 and he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards,
and give to hi officers, and to hi servants.

8:16 and he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and
your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to hi work.

8:17 He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his
servants.

8:18 and ye shall cri out in that day becaus of your king which ye
shal have chosen you; and the lord will not hear you in that day.

8:19 nevertheless the peopl refus to obey the voic of samuel; and
they said, nay; but we will have a king over us; 8:20 that we also may
b like all the nations; and that our king may judg us, and go out
befor us, and fight our battles.

8:21 and samuel heard all the word of the people, and he rehearsed
them in the ear of the lord.

8:22 and the lord said to samuel, hearken unto their voice, and make
them a king. and samuel said unto the men of israel, Go ye everi man
unto hi city.

9:1 now there wa a man of benjamin, whose name wa kish, the son of
abiel, the son of zeror, the son of bechorath, the son of aphiah, a
benjamite, a mighti man of power.

9:2 and he had a son, whose name wa saul, a choic young man, and a
goodly: and there wa not among the children of israel a goodlier
person than he: from hi shoulder and upward he wa higher than any
of the people.

9:3 and the ass of kish saul' father were lost. and kish said to
saul hi son, take now one of the servant with thee, and arise, go
seek the asses.

9:4 and he pass through mount ephraim, and pass through the land
of shalisha, but they found them not: then they pass through the
land of shalim, and there they were not: and he pass through the
land of the benjamites, but they found them not.

9:5 and when they were come to the land of zuph, saul said to his
serv that wa with him, come, and let us return; lest my father
leav care for the asses, and take thought for us.

9:6 and he said unto him, behold now, there is in thi citi a man of
god, and he is an honour man; all that he saith cometh sure to
pass: now let us go thither; peradventur he can shew us our way that
w should go.

9:7 then said saul to hi servant, but, behold, if we go, what shall
w bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is
not a present to bring to the man of god: what have we?  9:8 and the
serv answer saul again, and said, behold, I have here at hand the
fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man of god,
to tell us our way.

9:9 (beforetim in israel, when a man went to enquir of god, thu he
spake, come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now call a
prophet wa beforetim call a seer.)  9:10 then said saul to his
servant, well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the citi where
th man of god was.

9:11 and as they went up the hill to the city, they found young
maiden go out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?
9:12 and they answer them, and said, He is; behold, he is before
you: make hast now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrific of the peopl to day in the high place: 9:13 As soon as ye
b come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, befor he go up
to the high place to eat: for the peopl will not eat until he come,
becaus he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterward they eat that be
bidden. now therefor get you up; for about thi time ye shall find
him.

9:14 and they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
city, behold, samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
place.

9:15 now the lord had told samuel in hi ear a day befor saul came,
saying, 9:16 To morrow about thi time I will send thee a man out of
th land of benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my
peopl israel, that he may save my peopl out of the hand of the
philistines: for I have look upon my people, becaus their cri is
com unto me.

9:17 and when samuel saw saul, the lord said unto him, behold the man
whom I spake to thee of! thi same shall reign over my people.

9:18 then saul drew near to samuel in the gate, and said, tell me, i
pray thee, where the seer' hous is.

9:19 and samuel answer saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before
m unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow
i will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

9:20 and as for thine ass that were lost three day ago, set not thy
mind on them; for they are found. and on whom is all the desir of
israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thi father' house?  9:21 and
saul answer and said, Am not I a benjamite, of the smallest of the
trib of israel? and my famili the least of all the famili of the
trib of benjamin? wherefor then speakest thou so to me?  9:22 and
samuel took saul and hi servant, and brought them into the parlour,
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about thirti persons.

9:23 and samuel said unto the cook, bring the portion which I gave
thee, of which I said unto thee, set it by thee.

9:24 and the cook took up the shoulder, and that which wa upon it,
and set it befor saul. and samuel said, behold that which is left!
set it befor thee, and eat: for unto thi time hath it been kept for
the sinc I said, I have invit the people. So saul did eat with
samuel that day.

9:25 and when they were come down from the high place into the city,
samuel commun with saul upon the top of the house.

9:26 and they aros early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that samuel call saul to the top of the house, saying, up, that
i may send thee away. and saul arose, and they went out both of them,
h and samuel, abroad.

9:27 and as they were go down to the end of the city, samuel said
to saul, bid the servant pass on befor us, (and he pass on), but
stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of god.

10:1 then samuel took a vial of oil, and pour it upon hi head, and
kiss him, and said, Is it not becaus the lord hath anoint thee to
b captain over hi inheritance?  10:2 when thou art depart from me
to day, then thou shalt find two men by rachel' sepulchr in the
bord of benjamin at zelzah; and they will say unto thee, the asses
which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thi father hath left
th care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, what shall I do
for my son?  10:3 then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou
shalt come to the plain of tabor, and there shall meet thee three men
go up to god to bethel, one carri three kids, and another
carri three loav of bread, and anoth carri a bottl of wine:
10:4 and they will salut thee, and give thee two loav of bread;
which thou shalt receiv of their hands.

10:5 after that thou shalt come to the hill of god, where is the
garrison of the philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art
com thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a compani of prophets
com down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a
pipe, and a harp, befor them; and they shall prophesy: 10:6 and the
spirit of the lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesi with
them, and shalt be turn into anoth man.

10:7 and let it be, when these sign are come unto thee, that thou do
a occas serv thee; for god is with thee.

10:8 and thou shalt go down befor me to gilgal; and, behold, I will
com down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice
sacrific of peac offerings: seven day shalt thou tarry, till i
com to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.

10:9 and it wa so, that when he had turn hi back to go from
samuel, god gave him anoth heart: and all those sign came to pass
that day.

10:10 and when they came thither to the hill, behold, a compani of
prophet met him; and the spirit of god came upon him, and he
prophesi among them.

10:11 and it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetim saw that,
behold, he prophesi among the prophets, then the peopl said one to
another, what is thi that is come unto the son of kish? Is saul also
among the prophets?  10:12 and one of the same place answer and
said, but who is their father? therefor it becam a proverb, Is saul
also among the prophets?  10:13 and when he had made an end of
prophesying, he came to the high place.

10:14 and saul' uncl said unto him and to hi servant, whither went
ye?  and he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to samuel.

10:15 and saul' uncl said, tell me, I pray thee, what samuel said
unto you.

10:16 and saul said unto hi uncle, He told us plainli that the asses
wer found. but of the matter of the kingdom, whereof samuel spake, he
told him not.

10:17 and samuel call the peopl togeth unto the lord to mizpeh;
10:18 and said unto the children of israel, thu saith the lord god of
israel, I brought up israel out of egypt, and deliv you out of the
hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppress you: 10:19 and ye have thi day reject your god,
who himself save you out of all your advers and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, nay, but set a king over us.
now therefor present yourselv befor the lord by your tribes, and
bi your thousands.

10:20 and when samuel had caus all the tribe of israel to come
near, the tribe of benjamin wa taken.

10:21 when he had caus the tribe of benjamin to come near by their
families, the famili of matri wa taken, and saul the son of kish was
taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

10:22 therefor they enquir of the lord further, if the man should
yet come thither. and the lord answered, behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff.

10:23 and they ran and fetch him thence: and when he stood among the
people, he wa higher than ani of the peopl from hi shoulder and
upward.

10:24 and samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the lord hath
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? and all the
peopl shouted, and said, god save the king.

10:25 then samuel told the peopl the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up befor the lord. and samuel sent all the
peopl away, everi man to hi house.

10:26 and saul also went home to gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose heart god had touched.

10:27 but the children of belial said, how shall thi man save us? and
they despis him, and brought no presents. but he held hi peace.

11:1 then nahash the ammonit came up, and encamp against
jabeshgilead: and all the men of jabesh said unto nahash, make a
coven with us, and we will serv thee.

11:2 and nahash the ammonit answer them, On thi condit will i
mak a coven with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes,
and lay it for a reproach upon all israel.

11:3 and the elder of jabesh said unto him, give us seven days'
respite, that we may send messeng unto all the coast of israel:
and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

11:4 then came the messeng to gibeah of saul, and told the tidings
in the ear of the people: and all the peopl lift up their voices,
and wept.

11:5 and, behold, saul came after the herd out of the field; and saul
said, what aileth the peopl that they weep? and they told him the
tid of the men of jabesh.

11:6 and the spirit of god came upon saul when he heard those tidings,
and hi anger wa kindl greatly.

11:7 and he took a yoke of oxen, and hew them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coast of israel by the hand of messengers,
saying, whosoev cometh not forth after saul and after samuel, so
shal it be done unto hi oxen. and the fear of the lord fell on the
people, and they came out with one consent.

11:8 and when he number them in bezek, the children of israel were
thre hundr thousand, and the men of judah thirti thousand.

11:9 and they said unto the messeng that came, thu shall ye say
unto the men of jabeshgilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot,
y shall have help. and the messeng came and shew it to the men
of jabesh; and they were glad.

11:10 therefor the men of jabesh said, To morrow we will come out
unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

11:11 and it wa so on the morrow, that saul put the peopl in three
companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
watch, and slew the ammonit until the heat of the day: and it came
to pass, that they which remain were scattered, so that two of them
wer not left together.

11:12 and the peopl said unto samuel, who is he that said, shall saul
reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

11:13 and saul said, there shall not a man be put to death thi day:
for to day the lord hath wrought salvat in israel.

11:14 then said samuel to the people, come, and let us go to gilgal,
and renew the kingdom there.

11:15 and all the peopl went to gilgal; and there they made saul king
befor the lord in gilgal; and there they sacrif sacrific of
peac offer befor the lord; and there saul and all the men of
israel rejoic greatly.

12:1 and samuel said unto all israel, behold, I have hearken unto
your voic in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

12:2 and now, behold, the king walketh befor you: and I am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my son are with you: and I have walked
befor you from my childhood unto thi day.

12:3 behold, here I am: wit against me befor the lord, and before
hi anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or
whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have i
receiv ani bribe to blind mine eye therewith? and I will restor it
you.

12:4 and they said, thou hast not defraud us, nor oppress us,
neith hast thou taken ought of ani man' hand.

12:5 and he said unto them, the lord is wit against you, and his
anoint is wit thi day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
and they answered, He is witness.

12:6 and samuel said unto the people, It is the lord that advanced
mos and aaron, and that brought your father up out of the land of
egypt.

12:7 now therefor stand still, that I may reason with you befor the
lord of all the righteou act of the lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 when jacob wa come into egypt, and your father cri unto the
lord, then the lord sent mose and aaron, which brought forth your
fath out of egypt, and made them dwell in thi place.

12:9 and when they forgat the lord their god, he sold them into the
hand of sisera, captain of the host of hazor, and into the hand of the
philistines, and into the hand of the king of moab, and they fought
against them.

12:10 and they cri unto the lord, and said, We have sinned, because
w have forsaken the lord, and have serv baalim and ashtaroth: but
now deliv us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serv thee.

12:11 and the lord sent jerubbaal, and bedan, and jephthah, and
samuel, and deliv you out of the hand of your enemi on every
side, and ye dwell safe.

12:12 and when ye saw that nahash the king of the children of ammon
cam against you, ye said unto me, nay; but a king shall reign over
us: when the lord your god wa your king.

12:13 now therefor behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye
hav desired! and, behold, the lord hath set a king over you.

12:14 If ye will fear the lord, and serv him, and obey hi voice, and
not rebel against the command of the lord, then shall both ye and
also the king that reigneth over you continu follow the lord your
god: 12:15 but if ye will not obey the voic of the lord, but rebel
against the command of the lord, then shall the hand of the lord
b against you, as it wa against your fathers.

12:16 now therefor stand and see thi great thing, which the lord
wil do befor your eyes.

12:17 Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the lord, and
h shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceiv and see that your
wicked is great, which ye have done in the sight of the lord, in
ask you a king.

12:18 So samuel call unto the lord; and the lord sent thunder and
rain that day: and all the peopl greatli fear the lord and samuel.

12:19 and all the peopl said unto samuel, pray for thi servant unto
th lord thi god, that we die not: for we have ad unto all our sins
thi evil, to ask us a king.

12:20 and samuel said unto the people, fear not: ye have done all this
wickedness: yet turn not asid from follow the lord, but serv the
lord with all your heart; 12:21 and turn ye not aside: for then should
y go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are
vain.

12:22 for the lord will not forsak hi peopl for hi great name's
sake: becaus it hath pleas the lord to make you hi people.

12:23 moreov as for me, god forbid that I should sin against the
lord in ceas to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the
right way: 12:24 onli fear the lord, and serv him in truth with all
your heart: for consid how great thing he hath done for you.

12:25 but if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your king.

13:1 saul reign one year; and when he had reign two year over
israel, 13:2 saul chose him three thousand men of israel; whereof two
thousand were with saul in michmash and in mount bethel, and a
thousand were with jonathan in gibeah of benjamin: and the rest of the
peopl he sent everi man to hi tent.

13:3 and jonathan smote the garrison of the philistin that wa in
geba, and the philistin heard of it. and saul blew the trumpet
throughout all the land, saying, let the hebrew hear.

13:4 and all israel heard say that saul had smitten a garrison of the
philistines, and that israel also wa had in abomin with the
philistines. and the peopl were call togeth after saul to gilgal.

13:5 and the philistin gather themselv togeth to fight with
israel, thirti thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and
peopl as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they
cam up, and pitch in michmash, eastward from bethaven.

13:6 when the men of israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
peopl were distressed,) then the peopl did hide themselv in caves,
and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

13:7 and some of the hebrew went over jordan to the land of gad and
gilead. As for saul, he wa yet in gilgal, and all the peopl followed
him trembling.

13:8 and he tarri seven days, accord to the set time that samuel
had appointed: but samuel came not to gilgal; and the peopl were
scatt from him.

13:9 and saul said, bring hither a burnt offer to me, and peace
offerings. and he offer the burnt offering.

13:10 and it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of
off the burnt offering, behold, samuel came; and saul went out to
meet him, that he might salut him.

13:11 and samuel said, what hast thou done? and saul said, becaus i
saw that the peopl were scatter from me, and that thou camest not
within the day appointed, and that the philistin gathered
themselv togeth at michmash; 13:12 therefor said I, the
philistin will come down now upon me to gilgal, and I have not made
suppl unto the lord: I forc myself therefore, and offer a
burnt offering.

13:13 and samuel said to saul, thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the command of the lord thi god, which he command thee: for
now would the lord have establish thi kingdom upon israel for ever.

13:14 but now thi kingdom shall not continue: the lord hath sought him
a man after hi own heart, and the lord hath command him to be
captain over hi people, becaus thou hast not kept that which the
lord command thee.

13:15 and samuel arose, and gat him up from gilgal unto gibeah of
benjamin. and saul number the peopl that were present with him,
about six hundr men.

13:16 and saul, and jonathan hi son, and the peopl that were present
with them, abod in gibeah of benjamin: but the philistin encamped
in michmash.

13:17 and the spoiler came out of the camp of the philistin in
thre companies: one compani turn unto the way that leadeth to
ophrah, unto the land of shual: 13:18 and anoth compani turn the
way to bethhoron: and anoth compani turn to the way of the border
that looketh to the valley of zeboim toward the wilderness.

13:19 now there wa no smith found throughout all the land of israel:
for the philistin said, lest the hebrew make them sword or spears:
13:20 but all the israelit went down to the philistines, to sharpen
everi man hi share, and hi coulter, and hi axe, and hi mattock.

13:21 yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and
for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.

13:22 So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there wa neither
sword nor spear found in the hand of ani of the peopl that were with
saul and jonathan: but with saul and with jonathan hi son wa there
found.

13:23 and the garrison of the philistin went out to the passag of
michmash.

14:1 now it came to pass upon a day, that jonathan the son of saul
said unto the young man that bare hi armour, come, and let us go over
to the philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. but he told
not hi father.

14:2 and saul tarri in the uttermost part of gibeah under a
pomegran tree which is in migron: and the peopl that were with him
wer about six hundr men; 14:3 and ahiah, the son of ahitub,
ichabod' brother, the son of phinehas, the son of eli, the lord's
priest in shiloh, wear an ephod. and the peopl knew not that
jonathan wa gone.

14:4 and between the passages, by which jonathan sought to go over
unto the philistines' garrison, there wa a sharp rock on the one
side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was
bozez, and the name of the other seneh.

14:5 the forefront of the one wa situat northward over against
michmash, and the other southward over against gibeah.

14:6 and jonathan said to the young man that bare hi armour, come,
and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be
that the lord will work for us: for there is no restraint to the lord
to save by mani or by few.

14:7 and hi armourbear said unto him, Do all that is in thine
heart: turn thee; behold, I am with thee accord to thi heart.

14:8 then said jonathan, behold, we will pass over unto these men, and
w will discov ourselv unto them.

14:9 If they say thu unto us, tarri until we come to you; then we
wil stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.

14:10 but if they say thus, come up unto us; then we will go up: for
th lord hath deliv them into our hand: and thi shall be a sign
unto us.

14:11 and both of them discov themselv unto the garrison of the
philistines: and the philistin said, behold, the hebrew come forth
out of the hole where they had hid themselves.

14:12 and the men of the garrison answer jonathan and his
armourbearer, and said, come up to us, and we will shew you a thing.
and jonathan said unto hi armourbearer, come up after me: for the
lord hath deliv them into the hand of israel.

14:13 and jonathan climb up upon hi hand and upon hi feet, and
hi armourbear after him: and they fell befor jonathan; and his
armourbear slew after him.

14:14 and that first slaughter, which jonathan and hi armourbearer
made, wa about twenti men, within as it were an half acr of land,
which a yoke of oxen might plow.

14:15 and there wa trembl in the host, in the field, and among all
th people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and
th earth quaked: so it wa a veri great trembling.

14:16 and the watchmen of saul in gibeah of benjamin looked; and,
behold, the multitud melt away, and they went on beat down one
another.

14:17 then said saul unto the peopl that were with him, number now,
and see who is gone from us. and when they had numbered, behold,
jonathan and hi armourbear were not there.

14:18 and saul said unto ahiah, bring hither the ark of god. for the
ark of god wa at that time with the children of israel.

14:19 and it came to pass, while saul talk unto the priest, that the
nois that wa in the host of the philistin went on and increased:
and saul said unto the priest, withdraw thine hand.

14:20 and saul and all the peopl that were with him assembled
themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, everi man's
sword wa against hi fellow, and there wa a veri great discomfiture.

14:21 moreov the hebrew that were with the philistin befor that
time, which went up with them into the camp from the countri round
about, even they also turn to be with the israelit that were with
saul and jonathan.

14:22 likewis all the men of israel which had hid themselv in mount
ephraim, when they heard that the philistin fled, even they also
follow hard after them in the battle.

14:23 So the lord save israel that day: and the battl pass over
unto bethaven.

14:24 and the men of israel were distress that day: for saul had
adjur the people, saying, curs be the man that eateth ani food
until evening, that I may be aveng on mine enemies. So none of the
peopl tast ani food.

14:25 and all they of the land came to a wood; and there wa honey
upon the ground.

14:26 and when the peopl were come into the wood, behold, the honey
dropped; but no man put hi hand to hi mouth: for the peopl feared
th oath.

14:27 but jonathan heard not when hi father charg the peopl with
th oath: wherefor he put forth the end of the rod that wa in his
hand, and dip it in an honeycomb, and put hi hand to hi mouth;
and hi eye were enlightened.

14:28 then answer one of the people, and said, thi father straitly
charg the peopl with an oath, saying, curs be the man that eateth
ani food thi day. and the peopl were faint.

14:29 then said jonathan, My father hath troubl the land: see, i
pray you, how mine eye have been enlightened, becaus I tast a
littl of thi honey.

14:30 how much more, if hapli the peopl had eaten freeli to day of
th spoil of their enemi which they found? for had there not been
now a much greater slaughter among the philistines?  14:31 and they
smot the philistin that day from michmash to aijalon: and the
peopl were veri faint.

14:32 and the peopl flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen,
and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the peopl did eat them
with the blood.

14:33 then they told saul, saying, behold, the peopl sin against the
lord, in that they eat with the blood. and he said, Ye have
transgressed: roll a great stone unto me thi day.

14:34 and saul said, dispers yourselv among the people, and say
unto them, bring me hither everi man hi ox, and everi man hi sheep,
and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the lord in eating
with the blood.

and all the peopl brought everi man hi ox with him that night, and
slew them there.

14:35 and saul built an altar unto the lord: the same wa the first
altar that he built unto the lord.

14:36 and saul said, let us go down after the philistin by night,
and spoil them until the morn light, and let us not leav a man of
them. and they said, Do whatsoev seemeth good unto thee. then said
th priest, let us draw near hither unto god.

14:37 and saul ask counsel of god, shall I go down after the
philistines? wilt thou deliv them into the hand of israel? but he
answ him not that day.

14:38 and saul said, draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people:
and know and see wherein thi sin hath been thi day.

14:39 for, as the lord liveth, which saveth israel, though it be in
jonathan my son, he shall sure die. but there wa not a man among
al the peopl that answer him.

14:40 then said he unto all israel, Be ye on one side, and I and
jonathan my son will be on the other side. and the peopl said unto
saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee.

14:41 therefor saul said unto the lord god of israel, give a perfect
lot.

and saul and jonathan were taken: but the peopl escaped.

14:42 and saul said, cast lot between me and jonathan my son. and
jonathan wa taken.

14:43 then saul said to jonathan, tell me what thou hast done. and
jonathan told him, and said, I did but tast a littl honey with the
end of the rod that wa in mine hand, and, lo, I must die.

14:44 and saul answered, god do so and more also: for thou shalt
sur die, jonathan.

14:45 and the peopl said unto saul, shall jonathan die, who hath
wrought thi great salvat in israel? god forbid: as the lord
liveth, there shall not one hair of hi head fall to the ground; for
h hath wrought with god thi day. So the peopl rescu jonathan,
that he die not.

14:46 then saul went up from follow the philistines: and the
philistin went to their own place.

14:47 So saul took the kingdom over israel, and fought against all his
enemi on everi side, against moab, and against the children of
ammon, and against edom, and against the king of zobah, and against
th philistines: and whithersoev he turn himself, he vex them.

14:48 and he gather an host, and smote the amalekites, and delivered
israel out of the hand of them that spoil them.

14:49 now the son of saul were jonathan, and ishui, and melchishua:
and the name of hi two daughter were these; the name of the
firstborn merab, and the name of the younger michal: 14:50 and the
nam of saul' wife wa ahinoam, the daughter of ahimaaz: and the name
of the captain of hi host wa abner, the son of ner, saul' uncle.

14:51 and kish wa the father of saul; and ner the father of abner was
th son of abiel.

14:52 and there wa sore war against the philistin all the day of
saul: and when saul saw ani strong man, or ani valiant man, he took
him unto him.

15:1 samuel also said unto saul, the lord sent me to anoint thee to be
k over hi people, over israel: now therefor hearken thou unto the
voic of the word of the lord.

15:2 thu saith the lord of hosts, I rememb that which amalek did to
israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
egypt.

15:3 now go and smite amalek, and utterli destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass.

15:4 and saul gather the peopl together, and number them in
telaim, two hundr thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of judah.

15:5 and saul came to a citi of amalek, and laid wait in the valley.

15:6 and saul said unto the kenites, go, depart, get you down from
among the amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed
kind to all the children of israel, when they came up out of
egypt. So the kenit depart from among the amalekites.

15:7 and saul smote the amalekit from havilah until thou comest to
shur, that is over against egypt.

15:8 and he took agag the king of the amalekit alive, and utterly
destroy all the peopl with the edg of the sword.

15:9 but saul and the peopl spare agag, and the best of the sheep,
and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not utterli destroy them: but everi thing that was
vil and refuse, that they destroy utterly.

15:10 then came the word of the lord unto samuel, saying, 15:11 it
repenteth me that I have set up saul to be king: for he is turn back
from follow me, and hath not perform my commandments. and it
griev samuel; and he cri unto the lord all night.

15:12 and when samuel rose earli to meet saul in the morning, it was
told samuel, saying, saul came to carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
place, and is gone about, and pass on, and gone down to gilgal.

15:13 and samuel came to saul: and saul said unto him, bless be thou
of the lord: I have perform the command of the lord.

15:14 and samuel said, what meaneth then thi bleat of the sheep in
min ears, and the low of the oxen which I hear?  15:15 and saul
said, they have brought them from the amalekites: for the people
spar the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrific unto the
lord thi god; and the rest we have utterli destroyed.

15:16 then samuel said unto saul, stay, and I will tell thee what the
lord hath said to me thi night. and he said unto him, say on.

15:17 and samuel said, when thou wast littl in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribe of israel, and the lord anointed
the king over israel?  15:18 and the lord sent thee on a journey, and
said, Go and utterli destroy the sinner the amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed.

15:19 wherefor then didst thou not obey the voic of the lord, but
didst fli upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the lord?
15:20 and saul said unto samuel, yea, I have obey the voic of the
lord, and have gone the way which the lord sent me, and have brought
agag the king of amalek, and have utterli destroy the amalekites.

15:21 but the peopl took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
th thing which should have been utterli destroyed, to sacrific unto
th lord thi god in gilgal.

15:22 and samuel said, hath the lord as great delight in burnt
off and sacrifices, as in obey the voic of the lord? behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

15:23 for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubborn is
a iniqu and idolatry. becaus thou hast reject the word of the
lord, he hath also reject thee from be king.

15:24 and saul said unto samuel, I have sinned: for I have
transgress the command of the lord, and thi words: becaus i
fear the people, and obey their voice.

15:25 now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the lord.

15:26 and samuel said unto saul, I will not return with thee: for thou
hast reject the word of the lord, and the lord hath reject thee
from be king over israel.

15:27 and as samuel turn about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of hi mantle, and it rent.

15:28 and samuel said unto him, the lord hath rent the kingdom of
israel from thee thi day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou.

15:29 and also the strength of israel will not lie nor repent: for he
i not a man, that he should repent.

15:30 then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee,
befor the elder of my people, and befor israel, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the lord thi god.

15:31 So samuel turn again after saul; and saul worship the lord.

15:32 then said samuel, bring ye hither to me agag the king of the
amalekites. and agag came unto him delicately. and agag said, surely
th bitter of death is past.

15:33 and samuel said, As the sword hath made women childless, so
shal thi mother be childless among women. and samuel hew agag in
piec befor the lord in gilgal.

15:34 then samuel went to ramah; and saul went up to hi hous to
gibeah of saul.

15:35 and samuel came no more to see saul until the day of hi death:
nevertheless samuel mourn for saul: and the lord repent that he
had made saul king over israel.

16:1 and the lord said unto samuel, how long wilt thou mourn for saul,
se I have reject him from reign over israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, I will send thee to jess the bethlehemite: for i
hav provid me a king among hi sons.

16:2 and samuel said, how can I go? if saul hear it, he will kill me.
and the lord said, take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to
sacrific to the lord.

16:3 and call jess to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee.

16:4 and samuel did that which the lord spake, and came to bethlehem.
and the elder of the town trembl at hi coming, and said, comest
th peaceably?  16:5 and he said, peaceably: I am come to sacrifice
unto the lord: sanctifi yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.
and he sanctifi jess and hi sons, and call them to the
sacrifice.

16:6 and it came to pass, when they were come, that he look on
eliab, and said, sure the lord' anoint is befor him.

16:7 but the lord said unto samuel, look not on hi countenance, or on
th height of hi stature; becaus I have refus him: for the lord
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but
th lord looketh on the heart.

16:8 then jess call abinadab, and made him pass befor samuel. and
h said, neither hath the lord chosen this.

16:9 then jess made shammah to pass by. and he said, neither hath the
lord chosen this.

16:10 again, jess made seven of hi son to pass befor samuel. and
samuel said unto jesse, the lord hath not chosen these.

16:11 and samuel said unto jesse, are here all thi children? and he
said, there remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. and samuel said unto jesse, send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither.

16:12 and he sent, and brought him in. now he wa ruddy, and withal of
a beauti countenance, and goodli to look to. and the lord said,
arise, anoint him: for thi is he.

16:13 then samuel took the horn of oil, and anoint him in the midst
of hi brethren: and the spirit of the lord came upon david from that
day forward. So samuel rose up, and went to ramah.

16:14 but the spirit of the lord depart from saul, and an evil
spirit from the lord troubl him.

16:15 and saul' servant said unto him, behold now, an evil spirit
from god troubleth thee.

16:16 let our lord now command thi servants, which are befor thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cun player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from god is upon thee, that he shall
play with hi hand, and thou shalt be well.

16:17 and saul said unto hi servants, provid me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me.

16:18 then answer one of the servants, and said, behold, I have seen
a son of jess the bethlehemite, that is cun in playing, and a
mighti valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
com person, and the lord is with him.

16:19 wherefor saul sent messeng unto jesse, and said, send me
david thi son, which is with the sheep.

16:20 and jess took an ass laden with bread, and a bottl of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by david hi son unto saul.

16:21 and david came to saul, and stood befor him: and he love him
greatly; and he becam hi armourbearer.

16:22 and saul sent to jesse, saying, let david, I pray thee, stand
befor me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

16:23 and it came to pass, when the evil spirit from god wa upon
saul, that david took an harp, and play with hi hand: so saul was
refreshed, and wa well, and the evil spirit depart from him.

17:1 now the philistin gather togeth their armi to battle, and
wer gather togeth at shochoh, which belongeth to judah, and
pitch between shochoh and azekah, in ephesdammim.

17:2 and saul and the men of israel were gather together, and
pitch by the valley of elah, and set the battl in array against the
philistines.

17:3 and the philistin stood on a mountain on the one side, and
israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there wa a valley
between them.

17:4 and there went out a champion out of the camp of the philistines,
nam goliath, of gath, whose height wa six cubit and a span.

17:5 and he had an helmet of brass upon hi head, and he wa armed
with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat wa five thousand
shekel of brass.

17:6 and he had greav of brass upon hi legs, and a target of brass
between hi shoulders.

17:7 and the staff of hi spear wa like a weaver' beam; and his
spear' head weigh six hundr shekel of iron: and one bear a
shield went befor him.

17:8 and he stood and cri unto the armi of israel, and said unto
them, whi are ye come out to set your battl in array? am not I a
philistine, and ye servant to saul? choos you a man for you, and let
him come down to me.

17:9 If he be abl to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
y be our servants, and serv us.

17:10 and the philistin said, I defi the armi of israel thi day;
giv me a man, that we may fight together.

17:11 when saul and all israel heard those word of the philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatli afraid.

17:12 now david wa the son of that ephrathit of bethlehemjudah,
whos name wa jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the day of saul.

17:13 and the three eldest son of jess went and follow saul to the
battle: and the name of hi three son that went to the battl were
eliab the firstborn, and next unto him abinadab, and the third
shammah.

17:14 and david wa the youngest: and the three eldest follow saul.

17:15 but david went and return from saul to feed hi father' sheep
at bethlehem.

17:16 and the philistin drew near morn and evening, and presented
himself forti days.

17:17 and jess said unto david hi son, take now for thi brethren an
ephah of thi parch corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thi brethren; 17:18 and carri these ten chees unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thi brethren fare, and take their pledge.

17:19 now saul, and they, and all the men of israel, were in the
valley of elah, fight with the philistines.

17:20 and david rose up earli in the morning, and left the sheep with
a keeper, and took, and went, as jess had command him; and he came
to the trench, as the host wa go forth to the fight, and shouted
for the battle.

17:21 for israel and the philistin had put the battl in array, army
against army.

17:22 and david left hi carriag in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage, and ran into the army, and came and salut hi brethren.

17:23 and as he talk with them, behold, there came up the champion,
th philistin of gath, goliath by name, out of the armi of the
philistines, and spake accord to the same words: and david heard
them.

17:24 and all the men of israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,
and were sore afraid.

17:25 and the men of israel said, have ye seen thi man that is come
up?  sure to defi israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
wil give him hi daughter, and make hi father' hous free in
israel.

17:26 and david spake to the men that stood by him, saying, what shall
b done to the man that killeth thi philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from israel? for who is thi uncircumcis philistine, that
h should defi the armi of the live god?  17:27 and the people
answ him after thi manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man
that killeth him.

17:28 and eliab hi eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and eliab' anger wa kindl against david, and he said, whi camest
th down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? I know thi pride, and the naughti of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

17:29 and david said, what have I now done? Is there not a cause?
17:30 and he turn from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the peopl answer him again after the former manner.

17:31 and when the word were heard which david spake, they rehearsed
them befor saul: and he sent for him.

17:32 and david said to saul, let no man' heart fail becaus of him;
thi servant will go and fight with thi philistine.

17:33 and saul said to david, thou art not abl to go against this
philistin to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from hi youth.

17:34 and david said unto saul, thi servant kept hi father' sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 and I went out after him, and smote him, and deliv it out of
hi mouth: and when he aros against me, I caught him by hi beard,
and smote him, and slew him.

17:36 thi servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcis philistin shall be as one of them, see he hath
defi the armi of the live god.

17:37 david said moreover, the lord that deliv me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliv me out of
th hand of thi philistine. and saul said unto david, go, and the
lord be with thee.

17:38 and saul arm david with hi armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon hi head; also he arm him with a coat of mail.

17:39 and david gird hi sword upon hi armour, and he assay to
go; for he had not prove it. and david said unto saul, I cannot go
with these; for I have not prove them. and david put them off him.

17:40 and he took hi staff in hi hand, and chose him five smooth
ston out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd' bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and hi sling wa in hi hand: and he drew near
to the philistine.

17:41 and the philistin came on and drew near unto david; and the man
that bare the shield went befor him.

17:42 and when the philistin look about, and saw david, he
disdain him: for he wa but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance.

17:43 and the philistin said unto david, Am I a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? and the philistin curs david by hi gods.

17:44 and the philistin said to david, come to me, and I will give
thi flesh unto the fowl of the air, and to the beast of the field.

17:45 then said david to the philistine, thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the
nam of the lord of hosts, the god of the armi of israel, whom thou
hast defied.

17:46 thi day will the lord deliv thee into mine hand; and I will
smit thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the
carcas of the host of the philistin thi day unto the fowl of the
air, and to the wild beast of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a god in israel.

17:47 and all thi assembl shall know that the lord saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battl is the lord's, and he will give you
into our hands.

17:48 and it came to pass, when the philistin arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet david, that david hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the philistine.

17:49 and david put hi hand in hi bag, and took thenc a stone, and
slang it, and smote the philistin in hi forehead, that the stone
sunk into hi forehead; and he fell upon hi face to the earth.

17:50 So david prevail over the philistin with a sling and with a
stone, and smote the philistine, and slew him; but there wa no sword
in the hand of david.

17:51 therefor david ran, and stood upon the philistine, and took his
sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut
off hi head therewith. and when the philistin saw their champion
wa dead, they fled.

17:52 and the men of israel and of judah arose, and shouted, and
pursu the philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gat of ekron.

and the wound of the philistin fell down by the way to shaaraim,
even unto gath, and unto ekron.

17:53 and the children of israel return from chase after the
philistines, and they spoil their tents.

17:54 and david took the head of the philistine, and brought it to
jerusalem; but he put hi armour in hi tent.

17:55 and when saul saw david go forth against the philistine, he said
unto abner, the captain of the host, abner, whose son is thi youth?
and abner said, As thi soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.

17:56 and the king said, enquir thou whose son the stripl is.

17:57 and as david return from the slaughter of the philistine,
abn took him, and brought him befor saul with the head of the
philistin in hi hand.

17:58 and saul said to him, whose son art thou, thou young man? and
david answered, I am the son of thi servant jess the bethlehemite.

18:1 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speak unto
saul, that the soul of jonathan wa knit with the soul of david, and
jonathan love him as hi own soul.

18:2 and saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to
hi father' house.

18:3 then jonathan and david made a covenant, becaus he love him as
hi own soul.

18:4 and jonathan strip himself of the robe that wa upon him, and
gav it to david, and hi garments, even to hi sword, and to hi bow,
and to hi girdle.

18:5 and david went out whithersoev saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: and saul set him over the men of war, and he was
accept in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of
saul' servants.

18:6 and it came to pass as they came, when david wa return from
th slaughter of the philistine, that the women came out of all cities
of israel, sing and dancing, to meet king saul, with tabrets, with
joy, and with instrument of musick.

18:7 and the women answer one anoth as they played, and said, saul
hath slain hi thousands, and david hi ten thousands.

18:8 and saul wa veri wroth, and the say displeas him; and he
said, they have ascrib unto david ten thousands, and to me they have
ascrib but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
18:9 and saul eye david from that day and forward.

18:10 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from god
cam upon saul, and he prophesi in the midst of the house: and david
play with hi hand, as at other times: and there wa a javelin in
saul' hand.

18:11 and saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite david even
to the wall with it. and david avoid out of hi presenc twice.

18:12 and saul wa afraid of david, becaus the lord wa with him, and
wa depart from saul.

18:13 therefor saul remov him from him, and made him hi captain
ov a thousand; and he went out and came in befor the people.

18:14 and david behav himself wise in all hi ways; and the lord
wa with him.

18:15 wherefor when saul saw that he behav himself veri wisely, he
wa afraid of him.

18:16 but all israel and judah love david, becaus he went out and
cam in befor them.

18:17 and saul said to david, behold my elder daughter merab, her will
i give thee to wife: onli be thou valiant for me, and fight the lord's
battles.

for saul said, let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the
philistin be upon him.

18:18 and david said unto saul, who am I? and what is my life, or my
father' famili in israel, that I should be son in law to the king?
18:19 but it came to pass at the time when merab saul' daughter
should have been given to david, that she wa given unto adriel the
meholathit to wife.

18:20 and michal saul' daughter love david: and they told saul, and
th thing pleas him.

18:21 and saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to
him, and that the hand of the philistin may be against him.
wherefor saul said to david, thou shalt thi day be my son in law in
th one of the twain.

18:22 and saul command hi servants, saying, commun with david
secretly, and say, behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
serv love thee: now therefor be the king' son in law.

18:23 and saul' servant spake those word in the ear of david. and
david said, seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king' son in law,
se that I am a poor man, and lightli esteemed?  18:24 and the
serv of saul told him, saying, On thi manner spake david.

18:25 and saul said, thu shall ye say to david, the king desireth not
ani dowry, but an hundr foreskin of the philistines, to be avenged
of the king' enemies. but saul thought to make david fall by the hand
of the philistines.

18:26 and when hi servant told david these words, it pleas david
wel to be the king' son in law: and the day were not expired.

18:27 wherefor david aros and went, he and hi men, and slew of the
philistin two hundr men; and david brought their foreskins, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's
son in law. and saul gave him michal hi daughter to wife.

18:28 and saul saw and knew that the lord wa with david, and that
mich saul' daughter love him.

18:29 and saul wa yet the more afraid of david; and saul became
david' enemi continually.

18:30 then the princ of the philistin went forth: and it came to
pass, after they went forth, that david behav himself more wisely
than all the servant of saul; so that hi name wa much set by.

19:1 and saul spake to jonathan hi son, and to all hi servants, that
they should kill david.

19:2 but jonathan saul' son delight much in david: and jonathan
told david, saying, saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now
therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and
abid in a secret place, and hide thyself: 19:3 and I will go out and
stand besid my father in the field where thou art, and I will commune
with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee.

19:4 and jonathan spake good of david unto saul hi father, and said
unto him, let not the king sin against hi servant, against david;
becaus he hath not sin against thee, and becaus hi work have
been to thee-ward veri good: 19:5 for he did put hi life in hi hand,
and slew the philistine, and the lord wrought a great salvat for
al israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefor then wilt
thou sin against innoc blood, to slay david without a cause?  19:6
and saul hearken unto the voic of jonathan: and saul sware, As the
lord liveth, he shall not be slain.

19:7 and jonathan call david, and jonathan shew him all those
things.

and jonathan brought david to saul, and he wa in hi presence, as in
tim past.

19:8 and there wa war again: and david went out, and fought with the
philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
him.

19:9 and the evil spirit from the lord wa upon saul, as he sat in his
hous with hi javelin in hi hand: and david play with hi hand.

19:10 and saul sought to smite david even to the wall with the
javelin: but he slip away out of saul' presence, and he smote the
javelin into the wall: and david fled, and escap that night.

19:11 saul also sent messeng unto david' house, to watch him, and
to slay him in the morning: and michal david' wife told him, saying,
if thou save not thi life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

19:12 So michal let david down through a window: and he went, and
fled, and escaped.

19:13 and michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats' hair for hi bolster, and cover it with a cloth.

19:14 and when saul sent messeng to take david, she said, He is
sick.

19:15 and saul sent the messeng again to see david, saying, bring
him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.

19:16 and when the messeng were come in, behold, there wa an image
in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for hi bolster.

19:17 and saul said unto michal, whi hast thou deceiv me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? and michal answer saul, he
said unto me, let me go; whi should I kill thee?  19:18 So david fled,
and escaped, and came to samuel to ramah, and told him all that saul
had done to him. and he and samuel went and dwelt in naioth.

19:19 and it wa told saul, saying, behold, david is at naioth in
ramah.

19:20 and saul sent messeng to take david: and when they saw the
compani of the prophet prophesying, and samuel stand as appointed
ov them, the spirit of god wa upon the messeng of saul, and they
also prophesied.

19:21 and when it wa told saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesi likewise. and saul sent messeng again the third time,
and they prophesi also.

19:22 then went he also to ramah, and came to a great well that is in
sechu: and he ask and said, where are samuel and david? and one
said, behold, they be at naioth in ramah.

19:23 and he went thither to naioth in ramah: and the spirit of god
wa upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
naioth in ramah.

19:24 and he strip off hi cloth also, and prophesi before
samuel in like manner, and lay down nake all that day and all that
night. wherefor they say, Is saul also among the prophets?  20:1 and
david fled from naioth in ramah, and came and said befor jonathan,
what have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin befor thy
father, that he seeketh my life?  20:2 and he said unto him, god
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do noth either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and whi should my father
hid thi thing from me? it is not so.

20:3 and david sware moreover, and said, thi father certainli knoweth
that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, let not jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved: but truli as the lord liveth, and as
thi soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

20:4 then said jonathan unto david, whatsoev thi soul desireth, i
wil even do it for thee.

20:5 and david said unto jonathan, behold, to morrow is the new moon,
and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go,
that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

20:6 If thi father at all miss me, then say, david earnestli asked
leav of me that he might run to bethlehem hi city: for there is a
yearli sacrific there for all the family.

20:7 If he say thus, It is well; thi servant shall have peace: but if
h be veri wroth, then be sure that evil is determin by him.

20:8 therefor thou shalt deal kindli with thi servant; for thou hast
brought thi servant into a coven of the lord with thee:
notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why
shouldest thou bring me to thi father?  20:9 and jonathan said, far be
it from thee: for if I knew certainli that evil were determin by my
fath to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee?  20:10 then
said david to jonathan, who shall tell me? or what if thi father
answ thee roughly?  20:11 and jonathan said unto david, come, and
let us go out into the field. and they went out both of them into the
field.

20:12 and jonathan said unto david, O lord god of israel, when I have
sound my father about to morrow ani time, or the third day, and,
behold, if there be good toward david, and I then send not unto thee,
and shew it thee; 20:13 the lord do so and much more to jonathan: but
if it pleas my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and
send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the lord be with
thee, as he hath been with my father.

20:14 and thou shalt not onli while yet I live shew me the kind of
th lord, that I die not: 20:15 but also thou shalt not cut off thy
kind from my hous for ever: no, not when the lord hath cut off
th enemi of david everi one from the face of the earth.

20:16 So jonathan made a coven with the hous of david, saying, let
th lord even requir it at the hand of david' enemies.

20:17 and jonathan caus david to swear again, becaus he love him:
for he love him as he love hi own soul.

20:18 then jonathan said to david, To morrow is the new moon: and thou
shalt be missed, becaus thi seat will be empty.

20:19 and when thou hast stay three days, then thou shalt go down
quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the
busi wa in hand, and shalt remain by the stone ezel.

20:20 and I will shoot three arrow on the side thereof, as though i
shot at a mark.

20:21 and, behold, I will send a lad, saying, go, find out the arrows.
if I expressli say unto the lad, behold, the arrow are on thi side
of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peac to thee, and no
hurt; as the lord liveth.

20:22 but if I say thu unto the young man, behold, the arrow are
beyond thee; go thi way: for the lord hath sent thee away.

20:23 and as touch the matter which thou and I have spoken of,
behold, the lord be between thee and me for ever.

20:24 So david hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was
come, the king sat him down to eat meat.

20:25 and the king sat upon hi seat, as at other times, even upon a
seat by the wall: and jonathan arose, and abner sat by saul' side,
and david' place wa empty.

20:26 nevertheless saul spake not ani thing that day: for he thought,
someth hath befallen him, he is not clean; sure he is not clean.

20:27 and it came to pass on the morrow, which wa the second day of
th month, that david' place wa empty: and saul said unto jonathan
hi son, wherefor cometh not the son of jess to meat, neither
yesterday, nor to day?  20:28 and jonathan answer saul, david
earnestli ask leav of me to go to bethlehem: 20:29 and he said, let
m go, I pray thee; for our famili hath a sacrific in the city; and
mi brother, he hath command me to be there: and now, if I have found
favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my
brethren. therefor he cometh not unto the king' table.

20:30 then saul' anger wa kindl against jonathan, and he said unto
him, thou son of the pervers rebelli woman, do not I know that
thou hast chosen the son of jess to thine own confusion, and unto the
confus of thi mother' nakedness?  20:31 for as long as the son of
jess liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy
kingdom. wherefor now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely
die.

20:32 and jonathan answer saul hi father, and said unto him,
wherefor shall he be slain? what hath he done?  20:33 and saul cast a
javelin at him to smite him: wherebi jonathan knew that it was
determin of hi father to slay david.

20:34 So jonathan aros from the tabl in fierc anger, and did eat no
meat the second day of the month: for he wa griev for david,
becaus hi father had done him shame.

20:35 and it came to pass in the morning, that jonathan went out into
th field at the time appoint with david, and a littl lad with him.

20:36 and he said unto hi lad, run, find out now the arrow which i
shoot. and as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

20:37 and when the lad wa come to the place of the arrow which
jonathan had shot, jonathan cri after the lad, and said, Is not the
arrow beyond thee?  20:38 and jonathan cri after the lad, make
speed, haste, stay not. and jonathan' lad gather up the arrows, and
cam to hi master.

20:39 but the lad knew not ani thing: onli jonathan and david knew the
matter.

20:40 and jonathan gave hi artilleri unto hi lad, and said unto him,
go, carri them to the city.

20:41 and as soon as the lad wa gone, david aros out of a place
toward the south, and fell on hi face to the ground, and bowed
himself three times: and they kiss one another, and wept one with
another, until david exceeded.

20:42 and jonathan said to david, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have
sworn both of us in the name of the lord, saying, the lord be between
m and thee, and between my seed and thi seed for ever. and he arose
and departed: and jonathan went into the city.

21:1 then came david to nob to ahimelech the priest: and ahimelech was
afraid at the meet of david, and said unto him, whi art thou alone,
and no man with thee?  21:2 and david said unto ahimelech the priest,
th king hath command me a business, and hath said unto me, let no
man know ani thing of the busi whereabout I send thee, and what i
hav command thee: and I have appoint my servant to such and such
a place.

21:3 now therefor what is under thine hand? give me five loav of
bread in mine hand, or what there is present.

21:4 and the priest answer david, and said, there is no common bread
und mine hand, but there is hallow bread; if the young men have
kept themselv at least from women.

21:5 and david answer the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days, sinc I came out,
and the vessel of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a
mann common, yea, though it were sanctifi thi day in the vessel.

21:6 So the priest gave him hallow bread: for there wa no bread
ther but the shewbread, that wa taken from befor the lord, to put
hot bread in the day when it wa taken away.

21:7 now a certain man of the servant of saul wa there that day,
detain befor the lord; and hi name wa doeg, an edomite, the
chiefest of the herdmen that belong to saul.

21:8 and david said unto ahimelech, and is there not here under thine
hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my
weapon with me, becaus the king' busi requir haste.

21:9 and the priest said, the sword of goliath the philistine, whom
thou slewest in the valley of elah, behold, it is here wrap in a
cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is
no other save that here. and david said, there is none like that; give
it me.

21:10 and david aros and fled that day for fear of saul, and went to
achish the king of gath.

21:11 and the servant of achish said unto him, Is not thi david the
k of the land? did they not sing one to anoth of him in dances,
saying, saul hath slain hi thousands, and david hi ten thousands?
21:12 and david laid up these word in hi heart, and wa sore afraid
of achish the king of gath.

21:13 and he chang hi behaviour befor them, and feign himself
mad in their hands, and scrabbl on the door of the gate, and let
hi spittl fall down upon hi beard.

21:14 then said achish unto hi servants, lo, ye see the man is mad:
wherefor then have ye brought him to me?  21:15 have I need of mad
men, that ye have brought thi fellow to play the mad man in my
presence? shall thi fellow come into my house?  22:1 david therefore
depart thence, and escap to the cave adullam: and when his
brethren and all hi father' hous heard it, they went down thither
to him.

22:2 and everi one that wa in distress, and everi one that wa in
debt, and everi one that wa discontented, gather themselv unto
him; and he becam a captain over them: and there were with him about
four hundr men.

22:3 and david went thenc to mizpeh of moab: and he said unto the
k of moab, let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth,
and be with you, till I know what god will do for me.

22:4 and he brought them befor the king of moab: and they dwelt with
him all the while that david wa in the hold.

22:5 and the prophet gad said unto david, abid not in the hold;
depart, and get thee into the land of judah. then david departed, and
cam into the forest of hareth.

22:6 when saul heard that david wa discovered, and the men that were
with him, (now saul abod in gibeah under a tree in ramah, have his
spear in hi hand, and all hi servant were stand about him;) 22:7
then saul said unto hi servant that stood about him, hear now, ye
benjamites; will the son of jess give everi one of you field and
vineyards, and make you all captain of thousands, and captain of
hundreds; 22:8 that all of you have conspir against me, and there is
non that sheweth me that my son hath made a leagu with the son of
jesse, and there is none of you that is sorri for me, or sheweth unto
m that my son hath stir up my servant against me, to lie in wait,
a at thi day?  22:9 then answer doeg the edomite, which wa set
ov the servant of saul, and said, I saw the son of jess come to
nob, to ahimelech the son of ahitub.

22:10 and he enquir of the lord for him, and gave him victuals, and
gav him the sword of goliath the philistine.

22:11 then the king sent to call ahimelech the priest, the son of
ahitub, and all hi father' house, the priest that were in nob: and
they came all of them to the king.

22:12 and saul said, hear now, thou son of ahitub. and he answered,
her I am, my lord.

22:13 and saul said unto him, whi have ye conspir against me, thou
and the son of jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword,
and hast enquir of god for him, that he should rise against me, to
li in wait, as at thi day?  22:14 then ahimelech answer the king,
and said, and who is so faith among all thi servant as david,
which is the king' son in law, and goeth at thi bidding, and is
honour in thine house?  22:15 did I then begin to enquir of god
for him? be it far from me: let not the king imput ani thing unto his
servant, nor to all the hous of my father: for thi servant knew
noth of all this, less or more.

22:16 and the king said, thou shalt sure die, ahimelech, thou, and
al thi father' house.

22:17 and the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, turn,
and slay the priest of the lord: becaus their hand also is with
david, and becaus they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me.
but the servant of the king would not put forth their hand to fall
upon the priest of the lord.

22:18 and the king said to doeg, turn thou, and fall upon the priests.
and doeg the edomit turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on
that day fourscor and five person that did wear a linen ephod.

22:19 and nob, the citi of the priests, smote he with the edg of the
sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and
asses, and sheep, with the edg of the sword.

22:20 and one of the son of ahimelech the son of ahitub, named
abiathar, escaped, and fled after david.

22:21 and abiathar shew david that saul had slain the lord's
priests.

22:22 and david said unto abiathar, I knew it that day, when doeg the
edomit wa there, that he would sure tell saul: I have occasioned
th death of all the person of thi father' house.

22:23 abid thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life
seeketh thi life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.

23:1 then they told david, saying, behold, the philistin fight
against keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

23:2 therefor david enquir of the lord, saying, shall I go and
smit these philistines? and the lord said unto david, go, and smite
th philistines, and save keilah.

23:3 and david' men said unto him, behold, we be afraid here in
judah: how much more then if we come to keilah against the armi of
th philistines?  23:4 then david enquir of the lord yet again. and
th lord answer him and said, arise, go down to keilah; for I will
deliv the philistin into thine hand.

23:5 So david and hi men went to keilah, and fought with the
philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a
great slaughter. So david save the inhabit of keilah.

23:6 and it came to pass, when abiathar the son of ahimelech fled to
david to keilah, that he came down with an ephod in hi hand.

23:7 and it wa told saul that david wa come to keilah. and saul
said, god hath deliv him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by
ent into a town that hath gate and bars.

23:8 and saul call all the peopl togeth to war, to go down to
keilah, to besieg david and hi men.

23:9 and david knew that saul secretli practis mischief against him;
and he said to abiathar the priest, bring hither the ephod.

23:10 then said david, O lord god of israel, thi servant hath
certainli heard that saul seeketh to come to keilah, to destroy the
citi for my sake.

23:11 will the men of keilah deliv me up into hi hand? will saul
com down, as thi servant hath heard? O lord god of israel, I beseech
thee, tell thi servant. and the lord said, He will come down.

23:12 then said david, will the men of keilah deliv me and my men
into the hand of saul? and the lord said, they will deliv thee up.

23:13 then david and hi men, which were about six hundred, aros and
depart out of keilah, and went whithersoev they could go. and it
wa told saul that david wa escap from keilah; and he forbar to go
forth.

23:14 and david abod in the wilder in strong holds, and remained
in a mountain in the wilder of ziph. and saul sought him every
day, but god deliv him not into hi hand.

23:15 and david saw that saul wa come out to seek hi life: and david
wa in the wilder of ziph in a wood.

23:16 and jonathan saul' son arose, and went to david into the wood,
and strengthen hi hand in god.

23:17 and he said unto him, fear not: for the hand of saul my father
shal not find thee; and thou shalt be king over israel, and I shall
b next unto thee; and that also saul my father knoweth.

23:18 and they two made a coven befor the lord: and david abod in
th wood, and jonathan went to hi house.

23:19 then came up the ziphit to saul to gibeah, saying, doth not
david hide himself with us in strong hold in the wood, in the hill of
hachilah, which is on the south of jeshimon?  23:20 now therefore, o
king, come down accord to all the desir of thi soul to come down;
and our part shall be to deliv him into the king' hand.

23:21 and saul said, bless be ye of the lord; for ye have compassion
on me.

23:22 go, I pray you, prepar yet, and know and see hi place where
hi haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he
dealeth veri subtilly.

23:23 see therefore, and take knowledg of all the lurk places
wher he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty,
and I will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the
land, that I will search him out throughout all the thousand of
judah.

23:24 and they arose, and went to ziph befor saul: but david and his
men were in the wilder of maon, in the plain on the south of
jeshimon.

23:25 saul also and hi men went to seek him. and they told david;
wherefor he came down into a rock, and abod in the wilder of
maon. and when saul heard that, he pursu after david in the
wild of maon.

23:26 and saul went on thi side of the mountain, and david and his
men on that side of the mountain: and david made hast to get away for
fear of saul; for saul and hi men compass david and hi men round
about to take them.

23:27 but there came a messeng unto saul, saying, hast thee, and
come; for the philistin have invad the land.

23:28 wherefor saul return from pursu after david, and went
against the philistines: therefor they call that place
selahammahlekoth.

23:29 and david went up from thence, and dwelt in strong hold at
engedi.

24:1 and it came to pass, when saul wa return from follow the
philistines, that it wa told him, saying, behold, david is in the
wild of engedi.

24:2 then saul took three thousand chosen men out of all israel, and
went to seek david and hi men upon the rock of the wild goats.

24:3 and he came to the sheepcot by the way, where wa a cave; and
saul went in to cover hi feet: and david and hi men remain in the
sid of the cave.

24:4 and the men of david said unto him, behold the day of which the
lord said unto thee, behold, I will deliv thine enemi into thine
hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. then
david arose, and cut off the skirt of saul' robe privily.

24:5 and it came to pass afterward, that david' heart smote him,
becaus he had cut off saul' skirt.

24:6 and he said unto hi men, the lord forbid that I should do this
th unto my master, the lord' anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, see he is the anoint of the lord.

24:7 So david stay hi servant with these words, and suffer them
not to rise against saul. but saul rose up out of the cave, and went
on hi way.

24:8 david also aros afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried
aft saul, saying, My lord the king. and when saul look behind him,
david stoop with hi face to the earth, and bow himself.

24:9 and david said to saul, wherefor hearest thou men' words,
saying, behold, david seeketh thi hurt?  24:10 behold, thi day thine
ey have seen how that the lord had deliv thee to day into mine
hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared
thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for
h is the lord' anointed.

24:11 moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thi robe in my
hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thi robe, and kill thee
not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgress in
min hand, and I have not sin against thee; yet thou huntest my
soul to take it.

24:12 the lord judg between me and thee, and the lord aveng me of
thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:13 As saith the proverb of the ancients, wicked proceedeth from
th wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:14 after whom is the king of israel come out? after whom dost thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

24:15 the lord therefor be judge, and judg between me and thee, and
see, and plead my cause, and deliv me out of thine hand.

24:16 and it came to pass, when david had made an end of speaking
thes word unto saul, that saul said, Is thi thi voice, my son
david? and saul lift up hi voice, and wept.

24:17 and he said to david, thou art more righteou than I: for thou
hast reward me good, wherea I have reward thee evil.

24:18 and thou hast shew thi day how that thou hast dealt well with
me: forasmuch as when the lord had deliv me into thine hand, thou
killedst me not.

24:19 for if a man find hi enemy, will he let him go well away?
wherefor the lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me
thi day.

24:20 and now, behold, I know well that thou shalt sure be king, and
that the kingdom of israel shall be establish in thine hand.

24:21 swear now therefor unto me by the lord, that thou wilt not cut
off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
father' house.

24:22 and david sware unto saul. and saul went home; but david and his
men gat them up unto the hold.

25:1 and samuel died; and all the israelit were gather together,
and lament him, and buri him in hi hous at ramah. and david
arose, and went down to the wilder of paran.

25:2 and there wa a man in maon, whose possess were in carmel;
and the man wa veri great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a
thousand goats: and he wa shear hi sheep in carmel.

25:3 now the name of the man wa nabal; and the name of hi wife
abigail: and she wa a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful
countenance: but the man wa churlish and evil in hi doings; and he
wa of the hous of caleb.

25:4 and david heard in the wilder that nabal did shear hi sheep.

25:5 and david sent out ten young men, and david said unto the young
men, get you up to carmel, and go to nabal, and greet him in my name:
25:6 and thu shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, peac be
both to thee, and peac be to thine house, and peac be unto all that
thou hast.

25:7 and now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thi shepherds
which were with us, we hurt them not, neither wa there ought missing
unto them, all the while they were in carmel.

25:8 ask thi young men, and they will shew thee. wherefor let the
young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give,
i pray thee, whatsoev cometh to thine hand unto thi servants, and to
thi son david.

25:9 and when david' young men came, they spake to nabal accord to
al those word in the name of david, and ceased.

25:10 and nabal answer david' servants, and said, who is david? and
who is the son of jesse? there be mani servant now a day that break
away everi man from hi master.

25:11 shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that i
hav kill for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not
whenc they be?  25:12 So david' young men turn their way, and went
again, and came and told him all those sayings.

25:13 and david said unto hi men, gird ye on everi man hi sword. and
they gird on everi man hi sword; and david also gird on his
sword: and there went up after david about four hundr men; and two
hundr abod by the stuff.

25:14 but one of the young men told abigail, nabal' wife, saying,
behold, david sent messeng out of the wilder to salut our
master; and he rail on them.

25:15 but the men were veri good unto us, and we were not hurt,
neith miss we ani thing, as long as we were convers with them,
when we were in the fields: 25:16 they were a wall unto us both by
night and day, all the while we were with them keep the sheep.

25:17 now therefor know and consid what thou wilt do; for evil is
determin against our master, and against all hi household: for he
i such a son of belial, that a man cannot speak to him.

25:18 then abigail made haste, and took two hundr loaves, and two
bottl of wine, and five sheep readi dressed, and five measur of
parch corn, and an hundr cluster of raisins, and two hundred
cak of figs, and laid them on asses.

25:19 and she said unto her servants, Go on befor me; behold, I come
aft you. but she told not her husband nabal.

25:20 and it wa so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the
covert on the hill, and, behold, david and hi men came down against
her; and she met them.

25:21 now david had said, sure in vain have I kept all that this
fellow hath in the wilderness, so that noth wa miss of all that
pertain unto him: and he hath requit me evil for good.

25:22 So and more also do god unto the enemi of david, if I leav of
al that pertain to him by the morn light ani that pisseth against
th wall.

25:23 and when abigail saw david, she hasted, and light off the ass,
and fell befor david on her face, and bow herself to the ground,
25:24 and fell at hi feet, and said, upon me, my lord, upon me let
thi iniqu be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine
audience, and hear the word of thine handmaid.

25:25 let not my lord, I pray thee, regard thi man of belial, even
nabal: for as hi name is, so is he; nabal is hi name, and folli is
with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom
thou didst send.

25:26 now therefore, my lord, as the lord liveth, and as thi soul
liveth, see the lord hath withholden thee from come to shed
blood, and from aveng thyself with thine own hand, now let thine
enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as nabal.

25:27 and now thi bless which thine handmaid hath brought unto my
lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.

25:28 I pray thee, forgiv the trespass of thine handmaid: for the
lord will certainli make my lord a sure house; becaus my lord
fighteth the battl of the lord, and evil hath not been found in thee
al thi days.

25:29 yet a man is risen to pursu thee, and to seek thi soul: but the
soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundl of life with the lord thy
god; and the soul of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out
of the middl of a sling.

25:30 and it shall come to pass, when the lord shall have done to my
lord accord to all the good that he hath spoken concern thee,
and shall have appoint thee ruler over israel; 25:31 that thi shall
b no grief unto thee, nor offenc of heart unto my lord, either that
thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath aveng himself:
but when the lord shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember
thin handmaid.

25:32 and david said to abigail, bless be the lord god of israel,
which sent thee thi day to meet me: 25:33 and bless be thi advice,
and bless be thou, which hast kept me thi day from come to shed
blood, and from aveng myself with mine own hand.

25:34 for in veri deed, as the lord god of israel liveth, which hath
kept me back from hurt thee, except thou hadst hast and come to
meet me, sure there had not been left unto nabal by the morning
light ani that pisseth against the wall.

25:35 So david receiv of her hand that which she had brought him,
and said unto her, Go up in peac to thine house; see, I have
hearken to thi voice, and have accept thi person.

25:36 and abigail came to nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his
house, like the feast of a king; and nabal' heart wa merri within
him, for he wa veri drunken: wherefor she told him nothing, less or
more, until the morn light.

25:37 but it came to pass in the morning, when the wine wa gone out
of nabal, and hi wife had told him these things, that hi heart died
within him, and he becam as a stone.

25:38 and it came to pass about ten day after, that the lord smote
nabal, that he died.

25:39 and when david heard that nabal wa dead, he said, bless be
th lord, that hath plead the caus of my reproach from the hand of
nabal, and hath kept hi servant from evil: for the lord hath returned
th wicked of nabal upon hi own head. and david sent and communed
with abigail, to take her to him to wife.

25:40 and when the servant of david were come to abigail to carmel,
they spake unto her, saying, david sent us unto thee, to take thee to
him to wife.

25:41 and she arose, and bow herself on her face to the earth, and
said, behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
serv of my lord.

25:42 and abigail hasted, and aros and rode upon an ass, with five
damsel of her that went after her; and she went after the messengers
of david, and becam hi wife.

25:43 david also took ahinoam of jezreel; and they were also both of
them hi wives.

25:44 but saul had given michal hi daughter, david' wife, to phalti
th son of laish, which wa of gallim.

26:1 and the ziphit came unto saul to gibeah, saying, doth not david
hid himself in the hill of hachilah, which is befor jeshimon?  26:2
then saul arose, and went down to the wilder of ziph, have three
thousand chosen men of israel with him, to seek david in the
wild of ziph.

26:3 and saul pitch in the hill of hachilah, which is before
jeshimon, by the way. but david abod in the wilderness, and he saw
that saul came after him into the wilderness.

26:4 david therefor sent out spies, and understood that saul wa come
in veri deed.

26:5 and david arose, and came to the place where saul had pitched:
and david beheld the place where saul lay, and abner the son of ner,
th captain of hi host: and saul lay in the trench, and the people
pitch round about him.

26:6 then answer david and said to ahimelech the hittite, and to
abishai the son of zeruiah, brother to joab, saying, who will go down
with me to saul to the camp? and abishai said, I will go down with
thee.

26:7 So david and abishai came to the peopl by night: and, behold,
saul lay sleep within the trench, and hi spear stuck in the ground
at hi bolster: but abner and the peopl lay round about him.

26:8 then said abishai to david, god hath deliv thine enemi into
thin hand thi day: now therefor let me smite him, I pray thee, with
th spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the
second time.

26:9 and david said to abishai, destroy him not: for who can stretch
forth hi hand against the lord' anointed, and be guiltless?  26:10
david said furthermore, As the lord liveth, the lord shall smite him;
or hi day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
perish.

26:11 the lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against
th lord' anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is
at hi bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

26:12 So david took the spear and the cruse of water from saul's
bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it,
neith awaked: for they were all asleep; becaus a deep sleep from
th lord wa fallen upon them.

26:13 then david went over to the other side, and stood on the top of
an hill afar off; a great space be between them: 26:14 and david
cri to the people, and to abner the son of ner, saying, answerest
th not, abner? then abner answer and said, who art thou that
criest to the king?  26:15 and david said to abner, art not thou a
vali man? and who is like to thee in israel? wherefor then hast
thou not kept thi lord the king? for there came one of the peopl in
to destroy the king thi lord.

26:16 thi thing is not good that thou hast done. As the lord liveth,
y are worthi to die, becaus ye have not kept your master, the lord's
anointed.

and now see where the king' spear is, and the cruse of water that was
at hi bolster.

26:17 and saul knew david' voice, and said, Is thi thi voice, my son
david? and david said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.

26:18 and he said, wherefor doth my lord thu pursu after his
servant?  for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?  26:19
now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the word of his
servant. If the lord have stir thee up against me, let him accept
an offering: but if they be the children of men, curs be they before
th lord; for they have driven me out thi day from abid in the
inherit of the lord, saying, go, serv other gods.

26:20 now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth befor the
fac of the lord: for the king of israel is come out to seek a flea,
a when one doth hunt a partridg in the mountains.

26:21 then said saul, I have sinned: return, my son david: for I will
no more do thee harm, becaus my soul wa preciou in thine eye this
day: behold, I have play the fool, and have er exceedingly.

26:22 and david answer and said, behold the king' spear! and let
on of the young men come over and fetch it.

26:23 the lord render to everi man hi righteous and his
faithfulness; for the lord deliv thee into my hand to day, but i
would not stretch forth mine hand against the lord' anointed.

26:24 and, behold, as thi life wa much set by thi day in mine eyes,
so let my life be much set by in the eye of the lord, and let him
deliv me out of all tribulation.

26:25 then saul said to david, bless be thou, my son david: thou
shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So david
w on hi way, and saul return to hi place.

27:1 and david said in hi heart, I shall now perish one day by the
hand of saul: there is noth better for me than that I should
speedili escap into the land of the philistines; and saul shall
despair of me, to seek me ani more in ani coast of israel: so shall i
escap out of hi hand.

27:2 and david arose, and he pass over with the six hundr men that
wer with him unto achish, the son of maoch, king of gath.

27:3 and david dwelt with achish at gath, he and hi men, everi man
with hi household, even david with hi two wives, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail the carmelitess, nabal' wife.

27:4 and it wa told saul that david wa fled to gath: and he sought
no more again for him.

27:5 and david said unto achish, If I have now found grace in thine
eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may
dwel there: for whi should thi servant dwell in the royal citi with
thee?  27:6 then achish gave him ziklag that day: wherefor ziklag
pertaineth unto the king of judah unto thi day.

27:7 and the time that david dwelt in the countri of the philistines
wa a full year and four months.

27:8 and david and hi men went up, and invad the geshurites, and
th gezrites, and the amalekites: for those nation were of old the
inhabit of the land, as thou goest to shur, even unto the land of
egypt.

27:9 and david smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive,
and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels,
and the apparel, and returned, and came to achish.

27:10 and achish said, whither have ye made a road to day? and david
said, against the south of judah, and against the south of the
jerahmeelites, and against the south of the kenites.

27:11 and david save neither man nor woman alive, to bring tide to
gath, saying, lest they should tell on us, saying, So did david, and
so will be hi manner all the while he dwelleth in the countri of the
philistines.

27:12 and achish believ david, saying, He hath made hi people
israel utterli to abhor him; therefor he shall be my servant for
ever.

28:1 and it came to pass in those days, that the philistin gathered
their armi togeth for warfare, to fight with israel. and achish
said unto david, know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to battle, thou and thi men.

28:2 and david said to achish, sure thou shalt know what thi servant
can do. and achish said to david, therefor will I make thee keeper of
min head for ever.

28:3 now samuel wa dead, and all israel had lament him, and buried
him in ramah, even in hi own city. and saul had put away those that
had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

28:4 and the philistin gather themselv together, and came and
pitch in shunem: and saul gather all israel together, and they
pitch in gilboa.

28:5 and when saul saw the host of the philistines, he wa afraid, and
hi heart greatli trembled.

28:6 and when saul enquir of the lord, the lord answer him not,
neith by dreams, nor by urim, nor by prophets.

28:7 then said saul unto hi servants, seek me a woman that hath a
familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquir of her. and his
serv said to him, behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar
spirit at endor.

28:8 and saul disguis himself, and put on other raiment, and he
went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and
h said, I pray thee, divin unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring
m him up, whom I shall name unto thee.

28:9 and the woman said unto him, behold, thou knowest what saul hath
done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the
wizards, out of the land: wherefor then layest thou a snare for my
life, to caus me to die?  28:10 and saul sware to her by the lord,
saying, As the lord liveth, there shall no punish happen to thee
for thi thing.

28:11 then said the woman, whom shall I bring up unto thee? and he
said, bring me up samuel.

28:12 and when the woman saw samuel, she cri with a loud voice: and
th woman spake to saul, saying, whi hast thou deceiv me? for thou
art saul.

28:13 and the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
and the woman said unto saul, I saw god ascend out of the earth.

28:14 and he said unto her, what form is he of? and she said, An old
man cometh up; and he is cover with a mantle. and saul perceived
that it wa samuel, and he stoop with hi face to the ground, and
bow himself.

28:15 and samuel said to saul, whi hast thou disquiet me, to bring
m up? and saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the philistines
mak war against me, and god is depart from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefor I have called
thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.

28:16 then said samuel, wherefor then dost thou ask of me, see the
lord is depart from thee, and is becom thine enemy?  28:17 and the
lord hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the lord hath rent the
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thi neighbour, even to
david: 28:18 becaus thou obeyedst not the voic of the lord, nor
executedst hi fierc wrath upon amalek, therefor hath the lord done
thi thing unto thee thi day.

28:19 moreov the lord will also deliv israel with thee into the
hand of the philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thi son be with
me: the lord also shall deliv the host of israel into the hand of
th philistines.

28:20 then saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and wa sore
afraid, becaus of the word of samuel: and there wa no strength in
him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

28:21 and the woman came unto saul, and saw that he wa sore troubled,
and said unto him, behold, thine handmaid hath obey thi voice, and i
hav put my life in my hand, and have hearken unto thi word which
thou spakest unto me.

28:22 now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voic of
thin handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread befor thee; and eat,
that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thi way.

28:23 but he refused, and said, I will not eat. but hi servants,
togeth with the woman, compel him; and he hearken unto their
voice. So he aros from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

28:24 and the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and
kil it, and took flour, and knead it, and did bake unleavened
bread thereof: 28:25 and she brought it befor saul, and befor his
servants; and they did eat. then they rose up, and went away that
night.

29:1 now the philistin gather togeth all their armi to aphek:
and the israelit pitch by a fountain which is in jezreel.

29:2 and the lord of the philistin pass on by hundreds, and by
thousands: but david and hi men pass on in the rereward with
achish.

29:3 then said the princ of the philistines, what do these hebrews
here?  and achish said unto the princ of the philistines, Is not
thi david, the servant of saul the king of israel, which hath been
with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him
sinc he fell unto me unto thi day?  29:4 and the princ of the
philistin were wroth with him; and the princ of the philistines
said unto him, make thi fellow return, that he may go again to his
plac which thou hast appoint him, and let him not go down with us
to battle, lest in the battl he be an adversari to us: for wherewith
should he reconcil himself unto hi master? should it not be with the
head of these men?  29:5 Is not thi david, of whom they sang one to
anoth in dances, saying, saul slew hi thousands, and david hi ten
thousands?  29:6 then achish call david, and said unto him, surely,
a the lord liveth, thou hast been upright, and thi go out and thy
com in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not
found evil in thee sinc the day of thi come unto me unto thi day:
nevertheless the lord favour thee not.

29:7 wherefor now return, and go in peace, that thou displeas not
th lord of the philistines.

29:8 and david said unto achish, but what have I done? and what hast
thou found in thi servant so long as I have been with thee unto this
day, that I may not go fight against the enemi of my lord the king?
29:9 and achish answer and said to david, I know that thou art good
in my sight, as an angel of god: notwithstand the princ of the
philistin have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.

29:10 wherefor now rise up earli in the morn with thi master's
serv that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up earli in the
morning, and have light, depart.

29:11 So david and hi men rose up earli to depart in the morning, to
return into the land of the philistines. and the philistin went up
to jezreel.

30:1 and it came to pass, when david and hi men were come to ziklag
on the third day, that the amalekit had invad the south, and
ziklag, and smitten ziklag, and burn it with fire; 30:2 and had
taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either
great or small, but carri them away, and went on their way.

30:3 So david and hi men came to the city, and, behold, it wa burned
with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were
taken captives.

30:4 then david and the peopl that were with him lift up their
voic and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

30:5 and david' two wive were taken captives, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite.

30:6 and david wa greatli distressed; for the peopl spake of stoning
him, becaus the soul of all the peopl wa grieved, everi man for his
son and for hi daughters: but david encourag himself in the lord
hi god.

30:7 and david said to abiathar the priest, ahimelech' son, I pray
thee, bring me hither the ephod. and abiathar brought thither the
ephod to david.

30:8 and david enquir at the lord, saying, shall I pursu after this
troop? shall I overtak them? and he answer him, pursue: for thou
shalt sure overtak them, and without fail recov all.

30:9 So david went, he and the six hundr men that were with him, and
cam to the brook besor, where those that were left behind stayed.

30:10 but david pursued, he and four hundr men: for two hundred
abod behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the
brook besor.

30:11 and they found an egyptian in the field, and brought him to
david, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink
water; 30:12 and they gave him a piec of a cake of figs, and two
clust of raisins: and when he had eaten, hi spirit came again to
him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk ani water, three day and
thre nights.

30:13 and david said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whenc art
thou? and he said, I am a young man of egypt, servant to an amalekite;
and my master left me, becaus three day agon I fell sick.

30:14 We made an invas upon the south of the cherethites, and upon
th coast which belongeth to judah, and upon the south of caleb; and
w burn ziklag with fire.

30:15 and david said to him, canst thou bring me down to thi company?
and he said, swear unto me by god, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor
deliv me into the hand of my master, and I will bring thee down to
thi company.

30:16 and when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread
abroad upon all the earth, eat and drinking, and dancing, because
of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the
philistines, and out of the land of judah.

30:17 and david smote them from the twilight even unto the even of
th next day: and there escap not a man of them, save four hundred
young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.

30:18 and david recov all that the amalekit had carri away:
and david rescu hi two wives.

30:19 and there wa noth lack to them, neither small nor great,
neith son nor daughters, neither spoil, nor ani thing that they had
taken to them: david recov all.

30:20 and david took all the flock and the herds, which they drave
befor those other cattle, and said, thi is david' spoil.

30:21 and david came to the two hundr men, which were so faint that
they could not follow david, whom they had made also to abid at the
brook besor: and they went forth to meet david, and to meet the people
that were with him: and when david came near to the people, he saluted
them.

30:22 then answer all the wick men and men of belial, of those
that went with david, and said, becaus they went not with us, we will
not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every
man hi wife and hi children, that they may lead them away, and
depart.

30:23 then said david, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that
which the lord hath given us, who hath preserv us, and deliv the
compani that came against us into our hand.

30:24 for who will hearken unto you in thi matter? but as hi part is
that goeth down to the battle, so shall hi part be that tarrieth by
th stuff: they shall part alike.

30:25 and it wa so from that day forward, that he made it a statute
and an ordin for israel unto thi day.

30:26 and when david came to ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the
eld of judah, even to hi friends, saying, behold a present for you
of the spoil of the enemi of the lord; 30:27 To them which were in
bethel, and to them which were in south ramoth, and to them which were
in jattir, 30:28 and to them which were in aroer, and to them which
wer in siphmoth, and to them which were in eshtemoa, 30:29 and to
them which were in rachal, and to them which were in the citi of the
jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the citi of the kenites,
30:30 and to them which were in hormah, and to them which were in
chorashan, and to them which were in athach, 30:31 and to them which
wer in hebron, and to all the place where david himself and hi men
wer wont to haunt.

31:1 now the philistin fought against israel: and the men of israel
fl from befor the philistines, and fell down slain in mount gilboa.

31:2 and the philistin follow hard upon saul and upon hi sons;
and the philistin slew jonathan, and abinadab, and melchishua,
saul' sons.

31:3 and the battl went sore against saul, and the archer hit him;
and he wa sore wound of the archers.

31:4 then said saul unto hi armourbearer, draw thi sword, and thrust
m through therewith; lest these uncircumcis come and thrust me
through, and abus me. but hi armourbear would not; for he wa sore
afraid. therefor saul took a sword, and fell upon it.

31:5 and when hi armourbear saw that saul wa dead, he fell
likewis upon hi sword, and die with him.

31:6 So saul died, and hi three sons, and hi armourbearer, and all
hi men, that same day together.

31:7 and when the men of israel that were on the other side of the
valley, and they that were on the other side jordan, saw that the men
of israel fled, and that saul and hi son were dead, they forsook the
cities, and fled; and the philistin came and dwelt in them.

31:8 and it came to pass on the morrow, when the philistin came to
strip the slain, that they found saul and hi three son fallen in
mount gilboa.

31:9 and they cut off hi head, and strip off hi armour, and sent
into the land of the philistin round about, to publish it in the
hous of their idols, and among the people.

31:10 and they put hi armour in the hous of ashtaroth: and they
fasten hi bodi to the wall of bethshan.

31:11 and when the inhabit of jabeshgilead heard of that which the
philistin had done to saul; 31:12 all the valiant men arose, and
went all night, and took the bodi of saul and the bodi of hi sons
from the wall of bethshan, and came to jabesh, and burnt them there.

31:13 and they took their bones, and buri them under a tree at
jabesh, and fast seven days.




th second book of samuel

otherwis called:

th second book of the kings


1:1 now it came to pass after the death of saul, when david was
return from the slaughter of the amalekites, and david had abod two
day in ziklag; 1:2 It came even to pass on the third day, that,
behold, a man came out of the camp from saul with hi cloth rent,
and earth upon hi head: and so it was, when he came to david, that he
fel to the earth, and did obeisance.

1:3 and david said unto him, from whenc comest thou? and he said unto
him, out of the camp of israel am I escaped.

1:4 and david said unto him, how went the matter? I pray thee, tell
me.

and he answered, that the peopl are fled from the battle, and mani of
th peopl also are fallen and dead; and saul and jonathan hi son are
dead also.

1:5 and david said unto the young man that told him, how knowest thou
that saul and jonathan hi son be dead?  1:6 and the young man that
told him said, As I happen by chanc upon mount gilboa, behold, saul
lean upon hi spear; and, lo, the chariot and horsemen followed
hard after him.

1:7 and when he look behind him, he saw me, and call unto me. and
i answered, here am i.

1:8 and he said unto me, who art thou? and I answer him, I am an
amalekite.

1:9 He said unto me again, stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me:
for anguish is come upon me, becaus my life is yet whole in me.

1:10 So I stood upon him, and slew him, becaus I wa sure that he
could not live after that he wa fallen: and I took the crown that was
upon hi head, and the bracelet that wa on hi arm, and have brought
them hither unto my lord.

1:11 then david took hold on hi clothes, and rent them; and likewise
al the men that were with him: 1:12 and they mourned, and wept, and
fast until even, for saul, and for jonathan hi son, and for the
peopl of the lord, and for the hous of israel; becaus they were
fallen by the sword.

1:13 and david said unto the young man that told him, whenc art thou?
and he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an amalekite.

1:14 and david said unto him, how wast thou not afraid to stretch
forth thine hand to destroy the lord' anointed?  1:15 and david
cal one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. and
h smote him that he died.

1:16 and david said unto him, thi blood be upon thi head; for thy
mouth hath testifi against thee, saying, I have slain the lord's
anointed.

1:17 and david lament with thi lament over saul and over
jonathan hi son: 1:18 (also he bade them teach the children of judah
th use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of jasher.)
1:19 the beauti of israel is slain upon thi high places: how are the
mighti fallen!  1:20 tell it not in gath, publish it not in the
street of askelon; lest the daughter of the philistin rejoice,
lest the daughter of the uncircumcis triumph.

1:21 Ye mountain of gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be
rain, upon you, nor field of offerings: for there the shield of the
mighti is vile cast away, the shield of saul, as though he had not
been anoint with oil.

1:22 from the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow
of jonathan turn not back, and the sword of saul return not empty.

1:23 saul and jonathan were love and pleasant in their lives, and in
their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they
wer stronger than lions.

1:24 Ye daughter of israel, weep over saul, who cloth you in
scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornament of gold upon your
apparel.

1:25 how are the mighti fallen in the midst of the battle! O jonathan,
th wast slain in thine high places.

1:26 I am distress for thee, my brother jonathan: veri pleasant hast
thou been unto me: thi love to me wa wonderful, pass the love of
women.

1:27 how are the mighti fallen, and the weapon of war perished!  2:1
and it came to pass after this, that david enquir of the lord,
saying, shall I go up into ani of the citi of judah? and the lord
said unto him, Go up. and david said, whither shall I go up? and he
said, unto hebron.

2:2 So david went up thither, and hi two wive also, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail nabal' wife the carmelite.

2:3 and hi men that were with him did david bring up, everi man with
hi household: and they dwelt in the citi of hebron.

2:4 and the men of judah came, and there they anoint david king over
th hous of judah. and they told david, saying, that the men of
jabeshgilead were they that buri saul.

2:5 and david sent messeng unto the men of jabeshgilead, and said
unto them, bless be ye of the lord, that ye have shew this
kind unto your lord, even unto saul, and have buri him.

2:6 and now the lord shew kind and truth unto you: and I also will
requit you thi kindness, becaus ye have done thi thing.

2:7 therefor now let your hand be strengthened, and be ye valiant:
for your master saul is dead, and also the hous of judah have
anoint me king over them.

2:8 but abner the son of ner, captain of saul' host, took ishbosheth
th son of saul, and brought him over to mahanaim; 2:9 and made him
k over gilead, and over the ashurites, and over jezreel, and over
ephraim, and over benjamin, and over all israel.

2:10 ishbosheth saul' son wa forti year old when he began to reign
ov israel, and reign two years. but the hous of judah followed
david.

2:11 and the time that david wa king in hebron over the hous of
judah wa seven year and six months.

2:12 and abner the son of ner, and the servant of ishbosheth the son
of saul, went out from mahanaim to gibeon.

2:13 and joab the son of zeruiah, and the servant of david, went out,
and met togeth by the pool of gibeon: and they sat down, the one on
th one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

2:14 and abner said to joab, let the young men now arise, and play
befor us. and joab said, let them arise.

2:15 then there aros and went over by number twelv of benjamin,
which pertain to ishbosheth the son of saul, and twelv of the
serv of david.

2:16 and they caught everi one hi fellow by the head, and thrust his
sword in hi fellow' side; so they fell down together: wherefor that
plac wa call helkathhazzurim, which is in gibeon.

2:17 and there wa a veri sore battl that day; and abner wa beaten,
and the men of israel, befor the servant of david.

2:18 and there were three son of zeruiah there, joab, and abishai,
and asahel: and asahel wa as light of foot as a wild roe.

2:19 and asahel pursu after abner; and in go he turn not to the
right hand nor to the left from follow abner.

2:20 then abner look behind him, and said, art thou asahel? and he
answered, I am.

2:21 and abner said to him, turn thee asid to thi right hand or to
thi left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his
armour.

but asahel would not turn asid from follow of him.

2:22 and abner said again to asahel, turn thee asid from following
me: wherefor should I smite thee to the ground? how then should i
hold up my face to joab thi brother?  2:23 howbeit he refus to turn
aside: wherefor abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him
und the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell
down there, and die in the same place: and it came to pass, that as
mani as came to the place where asahel fell down and die stood still.

2:24 joab also and abishai pursu after abner: and the sun went down
when they were come to the hill of ammah, that lieth befor giah by
th way of the wilder of gibeon.

2:25 and the children of benjamin gather themselv togeth after
abner, and becam one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.

2:26 then abner call to joab, and said, shall the sword devour for
ever?  knowest thou not that it will be bitter in the latter end?
how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the peopl return from
follow their brethren?  2:27 and joab said, As god liveth, unless
th hadst spoken, sure then in the morn the peopl had gone up
everi one from follow hi brother.

2:28 So joab blew a trumpet, and all the peopl stood still, and
pursu after israel no more, neither fought they ani more.

2:29 and abner and hi men walk all that night through the plain,
and pass over jordan, and went through all bithron, and they came to
mahanaim.

2:30 and joab return from follow abner: and when he had gathered
al the peopl together, there lack of david' servant nineteen men
and asahel.

2:31 but the servant of david had smitten of benjamin, and of abner's
men, so that three hundr and threescor men died.

2:32 and they took up asahel, and buri him in the sepulchr of his
father, which wa in bethlehem. and joab and hi men went all night,
and they came to hebron at break of day.

3:1 now there wa long war between the hous of saul and the hous of
david: but david wax stronger and stronger, and the hous of saul
wax weaker and weaker.

3:2 and unto david were son born in hebron: and hi firstborn was
amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; 3:3 and hi second, chileab, of
abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite; and the third, absalom the
son of maacah the daughter of talmai king of geshur; 3:4 and the
fourth, adonijah the son of haggith; and the fifth, shephatiah the son
of abital; 3:5 and the sixth, ithream, by eglah david' wife. these
wer born to david in hebron.

3:6 and it came to pass, while there wa war between the hous of saul
and the hous of david, that abner made himself strong for the house
of saul.

3:7 and saul had a concubine, whose name wa rizpah, the daughter of
aiah: and ishbosheth said to abner, wherefor hast thou gone in unto
mi father' concubine?  3:8 then wa abner veri wroth for the word of
ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog' head, which against judah do shew
kind thi day unto the hous of saul thi father, to hi brethren,
and to hi friends, and have not deliv thee into the hand of
david, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concern this
woman?  3:9 So do god to abner, and more also, except, as the lord
hath sworn to david, even so I do to him; 3:10 To translat the
kingdom from the hous of saul, and to set up the throne of david over
israel and over judah, from dan even to beersheba.

3:11 and he could not answer abner a word again, becaus he feared
him.

3:12 and abner sent messeng to david on hi behalf, saying, whose
i the land? say also, make thi leagu with me, and, behold, my
hand shall be with thee, to bring about all israel unto thee.

3:13 and he said, well; I will make a leagu with thee: but one thing
i requir of thee, that is, thou shalt not see my face, except thou
first bring michal saul' daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

3:14 and david sent messeng to ishbosheth saul' son, saying,
deliv me my wife michal, which I espous to me for an hundred
foreskin of the philistines.

3:15 and ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from
phaltiel the son of laish.

3:16 and her husband went with her along weep behind her to
bahurim.

then said abner unto him, go, return. and he returned.

3:17 and abner had commun with the elder of israel, saying, ye
sought for david in time past to be king over you: 3:18 now then do
it: for the lord hath spoken of david, saying, By the hand of my
serv david I will save my peopl israel out of the hand of the
philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.

3:19 and abner also spake in the ear of benjamin: and abner went also
to speak in the ear of david in hebron all that seem good to
israel, and that seem good to the whole hous of benjamin.

3:20 So abner came to david to hebron, and twenti men with him. and
david made abner and the men that were with him a feast.

3:21 and abner said unto david, I will aris and go, and will gather
al israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a leagu with
thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth.
and david sent abner away; and he went in peace.

3:22 and, behold, the servant of david and joab came from pursu a
troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but abner wa not with
david in hebron; for he had sent him away, and he wa gone in peace.

3:23 when joab and all the host that wa with him were come, they told
joab, saying, abner the son of ner came to the king, and he hath sent
him away, and he is gone in peace.

3:24 then joab came to the king, and said, what hast thou done?
behold, abner came unto thee; whi is it that thou hast sent him away,
and he is quit gone?  3:25 thou knowest abner the son of ner, that he
cam to deceiv thee, and to know thi go out and thi come in, and
to know all that thou doest.

3:26 and when joab wa come out from david, he sent messeng after
abner, which brought him again from the well of sirah: but david knew
it not.

3:27 and when abner wa return to hebron, joab took him asid in the
gat to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth
rib, that he died, for the blood of asahel hi brother.

3:28 and afterward when david heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are
guiltless befor the lord for ever from the blood of abner the son of
ner: 3:29 let it rest on the head of joab, and on all hi father's
house; and let there not fail from the hous of joab one that hath an
issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth
on the sword, or that lacketh bread.

3:30 So joab, and abishai hi brother slew abner, becaus he had slain
their brother asahel at gibeon in the battle.

3:31 and david said to joab, and to all the peopl that were with him,
rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before
abner. and king david himself follow the bier.

3:32 and they buri abner in hebron: and the king lift up his
voice, and wept at the grave of abner; and all the peopl wept.

3:33 and the king lament over abner, and said, die abner as a fool
dieth?  3:34 thi hand were not bound, nor thi feet put into fetters:
a a man falleth befor wick men, so fellest thou. and all the
peopl wept again over him.

3:35 and when all the peopl came to caus david to eat meat while it
wa yet day, david sware, saying, So do god to me, and more also, if i
tast bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.

3:36 and all the peopl took notic of it, and it pleas them: as
whatsoev the king did pleas all the people.

3:37 for all the peopl and all israel understood that day that it was
not of the king to slay abner the son of ner.

3:38 and the king said unto hi servants, know ye not that there is a
princ and a great man fallen thi day in israel?  3:39 and I am this
day weak, though anoint king; and these men the son of zeruiah be
too hard for me: the lord shall reward the doer of evil accord to
hi wickedness.

4:1 and when saul' son heard that abner wa dead in hebron, hi hands
wer feeble, and all the israelit were troubled.

4:2 and saul' son had two men that were captain of bands: the name
of the one wa baanah, and the name of the other rechab, the son of
rimmon a beerothite, of the children of benjamin: (for beeroth also
wa reckon to benjamin.

4:3 and the beerothit fled to gittaim, and were sojourn there
until thi day.)  4:4 and jonathan, saul' son, had a son that was
lam of hi feet. He wa five year old when the tide came of saul
and jonathan out of jezreel, and hi nurs took him up, and fled: and
it came to pass, as she made hast to flee, that he fell, and became
lame. and hi name wa mephibosheth.

4:5 and the son of rimmon the beerothite, rechab and baanah, went,
and came about the heat of the day to the hous of ishbosheth, who lay
on a bed at noon.

4:6 and they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they
would have fetch wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and
rechab and baanah hi brother escaped.

4:7 for when they came into the house, he lay on hi bed in his
bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and behead him, and
took hi head, and gat them away through the plain all night.

4:8 and they brought the head of ishbosheth unto david to hebron, and
said to the king, behold the head of ishbosheth the son of saul thine
enemy, which sought thi life; and the lord hath aveng my lord the
k thi day of saul, and of hi seed.

4:9 and david answer rechab and baanah hi brother, the son of
rimmon the beerothite, and said unto them, As the lord liveth, who
hath redeem my soul out of all adversity, 4:10 when one told me,
saying, behold, saul is dead, think to have brought good tidings, i
took hold of him, and slew him in ziklag, who thought that I would
hav given him a reward for hi tidings: 4:11 how much more, when
wick men have slain a righteou person in hi own hous upon his
bed? shall I not therefor now requir hi blood of your hand, and
tak you away from the earth?  4:12 and david command hi young men,
and they slew them, and cut off their hand and their feet, and hanged
them up over the pool in hebron. but they took the head of ishbosheth,
and buri it in the sepulchr of abner in hebron.

5:1 then came all the tribe of israel to david unto hebron, and
spake, saying, behold, we are thi bone and thi flesh.

5:2 also in time past, when saul wa king over us, thou wast he that
leddest out and broughtest in israel: and the lord said to thee, thou
shalt feed my peopl israel, and thou shalt be a captain over israel.

5:3 So all the elder of israel came to the king to hebron; and king
david made a leagu with them in hebron befor the lord: and they
anoint david king over israel.

5:4 david wa thirti year old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forti years.

5:5 In hebron he reign over judah seven year and six months: and in
jerusalem he reign thirti and three year over all israel and judah.

5:6 and the king and hi men went to jerusalem unto the jebusites, the
inhabit of the land: which spake unto david, saying, except thou
tak away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither:
thinking, david cannot come in hither.

5:7 nevertheless david took the strong hold of zion: the same is the
citi of david.

5:8 and david said on that day, whosoev getteth up to the gutter,
and smiteth the jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated
of david' soul, he shall be chief and captain. wherefor they said,
th blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

5:9 So david dwelt in the fort, and call it the citi of david. and
david built round about from millo and inward.

5:10 and david went on, and grew great, and the lord god of host was
with him.

5:11 and hiram king of tyre sent messeng to david, and cedar trees,
and carpenters, and masons: and they built david an house.

5:12 and david perceiv that the lord had establish him king over
israel, and that he had exalt hi kingdom for hi peopl israel's
sake.

5:13 and david took him more concubin and wive out of jerusalem,
aft he wa come from hebron: and there were yet son and daughters
born to david.

5:14 and these be the name of those that were born unto him in
jerusalem; shammuah, and shobab, and nathan, and solomon, 5:15 ibhar
also, and elishua, and nepheg, and japhia, 5:16 and elishama, and
eliada, and eliphalet.

5:17 but when the philistin heard that they had anoint david king
ov israel, all the philistin came up to seek david; and david
heard of it, and went down to the hold.

5:18 the philistin also came and spread themselv in the valley of
rephaim.

5:19 and david enquir of the lord, saying, shall I go up to the
philistines? wilt thou deliv them into mine hand? and the lord said
unto david, Go up: for I will doubtless deliv the philistin into
thin hand.

5:20 and david came to baalperazim, and david smote them there, and
said, the lord hath broken forth upon mine enemi befor me, as the
breach of waters. therefor he call the name of that place
baalperazim.

5:21 and there they left their images, and david and hi men burned
them.

5:22 and the philistin came up yet again, and spread themselv in
th valley of rephaim.

5:23 and when david enquir of the lord, he said, thou shalt not go
up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against
th mulberri trees.

5:24 and let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a go in the tops
of the mulberri trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then
shal the lord go out befor thee, to smite the host of the
philistines.

5:25 and david did so, as the lord had command him; and smote the
philistin from geba until thou come to gazer.

6:1 again, david gather togeth all the chosen men of israel,
thirti thousand.

6:2 and david arose, and went with all the peopl that were with him
from baal of judah, to bring up from thenc the ark of god, whose
nam is call by the name of the lord of host that dwelleth between
th cherubims.

6:3 and they set the ark of god upon a new cart, and brought it out of
th hous of abinadab that wa in gibeah: and uzzah and ahio, the sons
of abinadab, drave the new cart.

6:4 and they brought it out of the hous of abinadab which wa at
gibeah, accompani the ark of god: and ahio went befor the ark.

6:5 and david and all the hous of israel play befor the lord on
al manner of instrument made of fir wood, even on harps, and on
psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.

6:6 and when they came to nachon' threshingfloor, uzzah put forth his
hand to the ark of god, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

6:7 and the anger of the lord wa kindl against uzzah; and god smote
him there for hi error; and there he die by the ark of god.

6:8 and david wa displeased, becaus the lord had made a breach upon
uzzah: and he call the name of the place perezuzzah to thi day.

6:9 and david wa afraid of the lord that day, and said, how shall the
ark of the lord come to me?  6:10 So david would not remov the ark of
th lord unto him into the citi of david: but david carri it aside
into the hous of obededom the gittite.

6:11 and the ark of the lord continu in the hous of obededom the
gittit three months: and the lord bless obededom, and all his
household.

6:12 and it wa told king david, saying, the lord hath bless the
hous of obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, becaus of the
ark of god. So david went and brought up the ark of god from the house
of obededom into the citi of david with gladness.

6:13 and it wa so, that when they that bare the ark of the lord had
gon six paces, he sacrif oxen and fatlings.

6:14 and david danc befor the lord with all hi might; and david
wa gird with a linen ephod.

6:15 So david and all the hous of israel brought up the ark of the
lord with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

6:16 and as the ark of the lord came into the citi of david, michal
saul' daughter look through a window, and saw king david leaping
and danc befor the lord; and she despis him in her heart.

6:17 and they brought in the ark of the lord, and set it in hi place,
in the midst of the tabernacl that david had pitch for it: and
david offer burnt offer and peac offer befor the lord.

6:18 and as soon as david had made an end of offer burnt offerings
and peac offerings, he bless the peopl in the name of the lord of
hosts.

6:19 and he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude
of israel, as well to the women as men, to everi one a cake of bread,
and a good piec of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people
depart everi one to hi house.

6:20 then david return to bless hi household. and michal the
daught of saul came out to meet david, and said, how gloriou was
th king of israel to day, who uncov himself to day in the eye of
th handmaid of hi servants, as one of the vain fellow shamelessly
uncovereth himself!  6:21 and david said unto michal, It wa before
th lord, which chose me befor thi father, and befor all hi house,
to appoint me ruler over the peopl of the lord, over israel:
therefor will I play befor the lord.

6:22 and I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine
own sight: and of the maidserv which thou hast spoken of, of them
shal I be had in honour.

6:23 therefor michal the daughter of saul had no child unto the day
of her death.

7:1 and it came to pass, when the king sat in hi house, and the lord
had given him rest round about from all hi enemies; 7:2 that the king
said unto nathan the prophet, see now, I dwell in an hous of cedar,
but the ark of god dwelleth within curtains.

7:3 and nathan said to the king, go, do all that is in thine heart;
for the lord is with thee.

7:4 and it came to pass that night, that the word of the lord came
unto nathan, saying, 7:5 Go and tell my servant david, thu saith the
lord, shalt thou build me an hous for me to dwell in?  7:6 wherea i
hav not dwelt in ani hous sinc the time that I brought up the
children of israel out of egypt, even to thi day, but have walk in
a tent and in a tabernacle.

7:7 In all the place wherein I have walk with all the children of
israel spake I a word with ani of the tribe of israel, whom i
command to feed my peopl israel, saying, whi build ye not me an
hous of cedar?  7:8 now therefor so shalt thou say unto my servant
david, thu saith the lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote,
from follow the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over israel: 7:9
and I wa with thee whithersoev thou wentest, and have cut off all
thin enemi out of thi sight, and have made thee a great name, like
unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.

7:10 moreov I will appoint a place for my peopl israel, and will
plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no
more; neither shall the children of wicked afflict them ani more,
a beforetime, 7:11 and as sinc the time that I command judg to
b over my peopl israel, and have caus thee to rest from all thine
enemies. also the lord telleth thee that he will make thee an house.

7:12 and when thi day be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers, I will set up thi seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
thi bowels, and I will establish hi kingdom.

7:13 He shall build an hous for my name, and I will stablish the
thron of hi kingdom for ever.

7:14 I will be hi father, and he shall be my son. If he commit
iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes
of the children of men: 7:15 but my merci shall not depart away from
him, as I took it from saul, whom I put away befor thee.

7:16 and thine hous and thi kingdom shall be establish for ever
befor thee: thi throne shall be establish for ever.

7:17 accord to all these words, and accord to all thi vision,
so did nathan speak unto david.

7:18 then went king david in, and sat befor the lord, and he said,
who am I, O lord god? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  7:19 and thi wa yet a small thing in thi sight, O lord
god; but thou hast spoken also of thi servant' hous for a great
whil to come. and is thi the manner of man, O lord god?  7:20 and
what can david say more unto thee? for thou, lord god, knowest thy
servant.

7:21 for thi word' sake, and accord to thine own heart, hast thou
don all these great things, to make thi servant know them.

7:22 wherefor thou art great, O lord god: for there is none like
thee, neither is there ani god besid thee, accord to all that we
hav heard with our ears.

7:23 and what one nation in the earth is like thi people, even like
israel, whom god went to redeem for a peopl to himself, and to make
him a name, and to do for you great thing and terrible, for thi land,
befor thi people, which thou redeemedst to thee from egypt, from the
nat and their gods?  7:24 for thou hast confirm to thyself thy
peopl israel to be a peopl unto thee for ever: and thou, lord, art
becom their god.

7:25 and now, O lord god, the word that thou hast spoken concerning
thi servant, and concern hi house, establish it for ever, and do
a thou hast said.

7:26 and let thi name be magnifi for ever, saying, the lord of hosts
i the god over israel: and let the hous of thi servant david be
establish befor thee.

7:27 for thou, O lord of hosts, god of israel, hast reveal to thy
servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefor hath thy
serv found in hi heart to pray thi prayer unto thee.

7:28 and now, O lord god, thou art that god, and thi word be true,
and thou hast promis thi good unto thi servant: 7:29 therefore
now let it pleas thee to bless the hous of thi servant, that it may
continu for ever befor thee: for thou, O lord god, hast spoken it:
and with thi bless let the hous of thi servant be bless for
ever.

8:1 and after thi it came to pass that david smote the philistines,
and subdu them: and david took methegammah out of the hand of the
philistines.

8:2 and he smote moab, and measur them with a line, cast them
down to the ground; even with two line measur he to put to death,
and with one full line to keep alive. and so the moabit became
david' servants, and brought gifts.

8:3 david smote also hadadezer, the son of rehob, king of zobah, as he
went to recov hi border at the river euphrates.

8:4 and david took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred
horsemen, and twenti thousand footmen: and david hough all the
chariot horses, but reserv of them for an hundr chariots.

8:5 and when the syrian of damascu came to succour hadadez king of
zobah, david slew of the syrian two and twenti thousand men.

8:6 then david put garrison in syria of damascus: and the syrians
becam servant to david, and brought gifts. and the lord preserved
david whithersoev he went.

8:7 and david took the shield of gold that were on the servant of
hadadezer, and brought them to jerusalem.

8:8 and from betah, and from berothai, citi of hadadezer, king david
took exceed much brass.

8:9 when toi king of hamath heard that david had smitten all the host
of hadadezer, 8:10 then toi sent joram hi son unto king david, to
salut him, and to bless him, becaus he had fought against hadadezer,
and smitten him: for hadadez had war with toi. and joram brought
with him vessel of silver, and vessel of gold, and vessel of brass:
8:11 which also king david did dedic unto the lord, with the silver
and gold that he had dedic of all nation which he subdued; 8:12
of syria, and of moab, and of the children of ammon, and of the
philistines, and of amalek, and of the spoil of hadadezer, son of
rehob, king of zobah.

8:13 and david gat him a name when he return from smite of the
syrian in the valley of salt, be eighteen thousand men.

8:14 and he put garrison in edom; throughout all edom put he
garrisons, and all they of edom becam david' servants. and the lord
preserv david whithersoev he went.

8:15 and david reign over all israel; and david execut judgment
and justic unto all hi people.

8:16 and joab the son of zeruiah wa over the host; and jehoshaphat
th son of ahilud wa recorder; 8:17 and zadok the son of ahitub, and
ahimelech the son of abiathar, were the priests; and seraiah wa the
scribe; 8:18 and benaiah the son of jehoiada wa over both the
cherethit and the pelethites; and david' son were chief rulers.

9:1 and david said, Is there yet ani that is left of the hous of
saul, that I may shew him kind for jonathan' sake?  9:2 and there
wa of the hous of saul a servant whose name wa ziba. and when they
had call him unto david, the king said unto him, art thou ziba?  and
h said, thi servant is he.

9:3 and the king said, Is there not yet ani of the hous of saul, that
i may shew the kind of god unto him? and ziba said unto the king,
jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on hi feet.

9:4 and the king said unto him, where is he? and ziba said unto the
king, behold, he is in the hous of machir, the son of ammiel, in
lodebar.

9:5 then king david sent, and fetch him out of the hous of machir,
th son of ammiel, from lodebar.

9:6 now when mephibosheth, the son of jonathan, the son of saul, was
com unto david, he fell on hi face, and did reverence. and david
said, mephibosheth. and he answered, behold thi servant!  9:7 and
david said unto him, fear not: for I will sure shew thee kindness
for jonathan thi father' sake, and will restor thee all the land of
saul thi father; and thou shalt eat bread at my tabl continually.

9:8 and he bow himself, and said, what is thi servant, that thou
shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?  9:9 then the king called
to ziba, saul' servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy
master' son all that pertain to saul and to all hi house.

9:10 thou therefore, and thi sons, and thi servants, shall till the
land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thi master's
son may have food to eat: but mephibosheth thi master' son shall eat
bread alway at my table. now ziba had fifteen son and twenty
servants.

9:11 then said ziba unto the king, accord to all that my lord the
k hath command hi servant, so shall thi servant do. As for
mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the
king' sons.

9:12 and mephibosheth had a young son, whose name wa micha. and all
that dwelt in the hous of ziba were servant unto mephibosheth.

9:13 So mephibosheth dwelt in jerusalem: for he did eat continu at
th king' table; and wa lame on both hi feet.

10:1 and it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of
ammon died, and hanun hi son reign in hi stead.

10:2 then said david, I will shew kind unto hanun the son of
nahash, as hi father shew kind unto me. and david sent to
comfort him by the hand of hi servant for hi father. and david's
serv came into the land of the children of ammon.

10:3 and the princ of the children of ammon said unto hanun their
lord, thinkest thou that david doth honour thi father, that he hath
sent comfort unto thee? hath not david rather sent hi servants
unto thee, to search the city, and to spi it out, and to overthrow it?
10:4 wherefor hanun took david' servants, and shave off the one
half of their beards, and cut off their garment in the middle, even
to their buttocks, and sent them away.

10:5 when they told it unto david, he sent to meet them, becaus the
men were greatli ashamed: and the king said, tarri at jericho until
your beard be grown, and then return.

10:6 and when the children of ammon saw that they stank befor david,
th children of ammon sent and hire the syrian of bethrehob and the
syrian of zoba, twenti thousand footmen, and of king maacah a
thousand men, and of ishtob twelv thousand men.

10:7 and when david heard of it, he sent joab, and all the host of the
mighti men.

10:8 and the children of ammon came out, and put the battl in array
at the enter in of the gate: and the syrian of zoba, and of rehob,
and ishtob, and maacah, were by themselv in the field.

10:9 when joab saw that the front of the battl wa against him before
and behind, he chose of all the choic men of israel, and put them in
array against the syrians: 10:10 and the rest of the peopl he
deliv into the hand of abishai hi brother, that he might put them
in array against the children of ammon.

10:11 and he said, If the syrian be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of ammon be too strong for thee,
then I will come and help thee.

10:12 Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and
for the citi of our god: and the lord do that which seemeth him
good.

10:13 and joab drew nigh, and the peopl that were with him, unto the
battl against the syrians: and they fled befor him.

10:14 and when the children of ammon saw that the syrian were fled,
then fled they also befor abishai, and enter into the city. So joab
return from the children of ammon, and came to jerusalem.

10:15 and when the syrian saw that they were smitten befor israel,
they gather themselv together.

10:16 and hadarez sent, and brought out the syrian that were beyond
th river: and they came to helam; and shobach the captain of the host
of hadarez went befor them.

10:17 and when it wa told david, he gather all israel together, and
pass over jordan, and came to helam. and the syrian set themselves
in array against david, and fought with him.

10:18 and the syrian fled befor israel; and david slew the men of
seven hundr chariot of the syrians, and forti thousand horsemen,
and smote shobach the captain of their host, who die there.

10:19 and when all the king that were servant to hadarez saw that
they were smitten befor israel, they made peac with israel, and
serv them. So the syrian fear to help the children of ammon any
more.

11:1 and it came to pass, after the year wa expired, at the time when
k go forth to battle, that david sent joab, and hi servant with
him, and all israel; and they destroy the children of ammon, and
besieg rabbah. but david tarri still at jerusalem.

11:2 and it came to pass in an eveningtide, that david aros from off
hi bed, and walk upon the roof of the king' house: and from the
roof he saw a woman wash herself; and the woman wa veri beautiful
to look upon.

11:3 and david sent and enquir after the woman. and one said, Is not
thi bathsheba, the daughter of eliam, the wife of uriah the hittite?
11:4 and david sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto
him, and he lay with her; for she wa purifi from her uncleanness:
and she return unto her house.

11:5 and the woman conceived, and sent and told david, and said, I am
with child.

11:6 and david sent to joab, saying, send me uriah the hittite. and
joab sent uriah to david.

11:7 and when uriah wa come unto him, david demand of him how joab
did, and how the peopl did, and how the war prospered.

11:8 and david said to uriah, Go down to thi house, and wash thi feet.
and uriah depart out of the king' house, and there follow him a
mess of meat from the king.

11:9 but uriah slept at the door of the king' hous with all the
serv of hi lord, and went not down to hi house.

11:10 and when they had told david, saying, uriah went not down unto
hi house, david said unto uriah, camest thou not from thi journey?
whi then didst thou not go down unto thine house?  11:11 and uriah
said unto david, the ark, and israel, and judah, abid in tents; and
mi lord joab, and the servant of my lord, are encamp in the open
fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to
li with my wife? as thou livest, and as thi soul liveth, I will not
do thi thing.

11:12 and david said to uriah, tarri here to day also, and to morrow i
wil let thee depart. So uriah abod in jerusalem that day, and the
morrow.

11:13 and when david had call him, he did eat and drink befor him;
and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on hi bed with
th servant of hi lord, but went not down to hi house.

11:14 and it came to pass in the morning, that david wrote a letter to
joab, and sent it by the hand of uriah.

11:15 and he wrote in the letter, saying, set ye uriah in the
forefront of the hottest battle, and retir ye from him, that he may
b smitten, and die.

11:16 and it came to pass, when joab observ the city, that he
assign uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

11:17 and the men of the citi went out, and fought with joab: and
ther fell some of the peopl of the servant of david; and uriah the
hittit die also.

11:18 then joab sent and told david all the thing concern the war;
11:19 and charg the messenger, saying, when thou hast made an end of
tel the matter of the war unto the king, 11:20 and if so be that
th king' wrath arise, and he say unto thee, wherefor approach ye
so nigh unto the citi when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would
shoot from the wall?  11:21 who smote abimelech the son of
jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piec of a millston upon him
from the wall, that he die in thebez? whi went ye nigh the wall? then
say thou, thi servant uriah the hittit is dead also.

11:22 So the messeng went, and came and shew david all that joab
had sent him for.

11:23 and the messeng said unto david, sure the men prevailed
against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them
even unto the enter of the gate.

11:24 and the shooter shot from off the wall upon thi servants; and
som of the king' servant be dead, and thi servant uriah the hittite
i dead also.

11:25 then david said unto the messenger, thu shalt thou say unto
joab, let not thi thing displeas thee, for the sword devoureth one
a well as another: make thi battl more strong against the city, and
overthrow it: and encourag thou him.

11:26 and when the wife of uriah heard that uriah her husband was
dead, she mourn for her husband.

11:27 and when the mourn wa past, david sent and fetch her to
hi house, and she becam hi wife, and bare him a son. but the thing
that david had done displeas the lord.

12:1 and the lord sent nathan unto david. and he came unto him, and
said unto him, there were two men in one city; the one rich, and the
oth poor.

12:2 the rich man had exceed mani flock and herds: 12:3 but the
poor man had nothing, save one littl ewe lamb, which he had bought
and nourish up: and it grew up togeth with him, and with his
children; it did eat of hi own meat, and drank of hi own cup, and
lay in hi bosom, and wa unto him as a daughter.

12:4 and there came a travel unto the rich man, and he spare to
tak of hi own flock and of hi own herd, to dress for the wayfaring
man that wa come unto him; but took the poor man' lamb, and dressed
it for the man that wa come to him.

12:5 and david' anger wa greatli kindl against the man; and he
said to nathan, As the lord liveth, the man that hath done thi thing
shal sure die: 12:6 and he shall restor the lamb fourfold, because
h did thi thing, and becaus he had no pity.

12:7 and nathan said to david, thou art the man. thu saith the lord
god of israel, I anoint thee king over israel, and I deliv thee
out of the hand of saul; 12:8 and I gave thee thi master' house, and
thi master' wive into thi bosom, and gave thee the hous of israel
and of judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreov have
given unto thee such and such things.

12:9 wherefor hast thou despis the command of the lord, to do
evil in hi sight? thou hast kill uriah the hittit with the sword,
and hast taken hi wife to be thi wife, and hast slain him with the
sword of the children of ammon.

12:10 now therefor the sword shall never depart from thine house;
becaus thou hast despis me, and hast taken the wife of uriah the
hittit to be thi wife.

12:11 thu saith the lord, behold, I will rais up evil against thee
out of thine own house, and I will take thi wive befor thine eyes,
and give them unto thi neighbour, and he shall lie with thi wive in
th sight of thi sun.

12:12 for thou didst it secretly: but I will do thi thing befor all
israel, and befor the sun.

12:13 and david said unto nathan, I have sin against the lord. and
nathan said unto david, the lord also hath put away thi sin; thou
shalt not die.

12:14 howbeit, becaus by thi deed thou hast given great occas to
th enemi of the lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto
the shall sure die.

12:15 and nathan depart unto hi house. and the lord struck the
child that uriah' wife bare unto david, and it wa veri sick.

12:16 david therefor besought god for the child; and david fasted,
and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

12:17 and the elder of hi hous arose, and went to him, to rais him
up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with
them.

12:18 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. and
th servant of david fear to tell him that the child wa dead: for
they said, behold, while the child wa yet alive, we spake unto him,
and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself,
if we tell him that the child is dead?  12:19 but when david saw that
hi servant whispered, david perceiv that the child wa dead:
therefor david said unto hi servants, Is the child dead? and they
said, He is dead.

12:20 then david aros from the earth, and washed, and anointed
himself, and chang hi apparel, and came into the hous of the lord,
and worshipped: then he came to hi own house; and when he required,
they set bread befor him, and he did eat.

12:21 then said hi servant unto him, what thing is thi that thou
hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it wa alive;
but when the child wa dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

12:22 and he said, while the child wa yet alive, I fast and wept:
for I said, who can tell whether god will be graciou to me, that the
child may live?  12:23 but now he is dead, wherefor should I fast?
can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return
to me.

12:24 and david comfort bathsheba hi wife, and went in unto her,
and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he call hi name solomon:
and the lord love him.

12:25 and he sent by the hand of nathan the prophet; and he call his
nam jedidiah, becaus of the lord.

12:26 and joab fought against rabbah of the children of ammon, and
took the royal city.

12:27 and joab sent messeng to david, and said, I have fought
against rabbah, and have taken the citi of waters.

12:28 now therefor gather the rest of the peopl together, and encamp
against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called
aft my name.

12:29 and david gather all the peopl together, and went to rabbah,
and fought against it, and took it.

12:30 and he took their king' crown from off hi head, the weight
whereof wa a talent of gold with the preciou stones: and it wa set
on david' head. and he brought forth the spoil of the citi in great
abundance.

12:31 and he brought forth the peopl that were therein, and put them
und saws, and under harrow of iron, and under axe of iron, and
mad them pass through the brick-kiln: and thu did he unto all the
citi of the children of ammon. So david and all the peopl returned
unto jerusalem.

13:1 and it came to pass after this, that absalom the son of david had
a fair sister, whose name wa tamar; and amnon the son of david loved
her.

13:2 and amnon wa so vexed, that he fell sick for hi sister tamar;
for she wa a virgin; and amnon thought it hard for him to do anything
to her.

13:3 but amnon had a friend, whose name wa jonadab, the son of
shimeah david' brother: and jonadab wa a veri subtil man.

13:4 and he said unto him, whi art thou, be the king' son, lean
from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? and amnon said unto him, i
lov tamar, my brother absalom' sister.

13:5 and jonadab said unto him, lay thee down on thi bed, and make
thyself sick: and when thi father cometh to see thee, say unto him, i
pray thee, let my sister tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the
meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.

13:6 So amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was
com to see him, amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let tamar my
sist come, and make me a coupl of cake in my sight, that I may eat
at her hand.

13:7 then david sent home to tamar, saying, Go now to thi brother
amnon' house, and dress him meat.

13:8 So tamar went to her brother amnon' house; and he wa laid down.
and she took flour, and knead it, and made cake in hi sight, and
did bake the cakes.

13:9 and she took a pan, and pour them out befor him; but he
refus to eat. and amnon said, have out all men from me. and they
went out everi man from him.

13:10 and amnon said unto tamar, bring the meat into the chamber, that
i may eat of thine hand. and tamar took the cake which she had made,
and brought them into the chamber to amnon her brother.

13:11 and when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of
her, and said unto her, come lie with me, my sister.

13:12 and she answer him, nay, my brother, do not forc me; for no
such thing ought to be done in israel: do not thou thi folly.

13:13 and I, whither shall I caus my shame to go? and as for thee,
thou shalt be as one of the fool in israel. now therefore, I pray
thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.

13:14 howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, be stronger
than she, forc her, and lay with her.

13:15 then amnon hate her exceedingly; so that the hatr wherewith
h hate her wa greater than the love wherewith he had love her. and
amnon said unto her, arise, be gone.

13:16 and she said unto him, there is no cause: thi evil in sending
m away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. but he
would not hearken unto her.

13:17 then he call hi servant that minist unto him, and said,
put now thi woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.

13:18 and she had a garment of diver colour upon her: for with such
rob were the king' daughter that were virgin apparelled. then his
serv brought her out, and bolt the door after her.

13:19 and tamar put ash on her head, and rent her garment of divers
colour that wa on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on
crying.

13:20 and absalom her brother said unto her, hath amnon thi brother
been with thee? but hold now thi peace, my sister: he is thi brother;
regard not thi thing. So tamar remain desol in her brother
absalom' house.

13:21 but when king david heard of all these things, he wa very
wroth.

13:22 and absalom spake unto hi brother amnon neither good nor bad:
for absalom hate amnon, becaus he had forc hi sister tamar.

13:23 and it came to pass after two full years, that absalom had
sheepshear in baalhazor, which is besid ephraim: and absalom
invit all the king' sons.

13:24 and absalom came to the king, and said, behold now, thi servant
hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and hi servant go
with thi servant.

13:25 and the king said to absalom, nay, my son, let us not all now
go, lest we be chargeabl unto thee. and he press him: howbeit he
would not go, but bless him.

13:26 then said absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother amnon go
with us. and the king said unto him, whi should he go with thee?
13:27 but absalom press him, that he let amnon and all the king's
son go with him.

13:28 now absalom had command hi servants, saying, mark ye now when
amnon' heart is merri with wine, and when I say unto you, smite
amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I command you? be
courageous, and be valiant.

13:29 and the servant of absalom did unto amnon as absalom had
commanded.

then all the king' son arose, and everi man gat him up upon his
mule, and fled.

13:30 and it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings
cam to david, saying, absalom hath slain all the king' sons, and
ther is not one of them left.

13:31 then the king arose, and tare hi garments, and lay on the
earth; and all hi servant stood by with their cloth rent.

13:32 and jonadab, the son of shimeah david' brother, answer and
said, let not my lord suppos that they have slain all the young men
th king' sons; for amnon onli is dead: for by the appoint of
absalom thi hath been determin from the day that he forc his
sist tamar.

13:33 now therefor let not my lord the king take the thing to his
heart, to think that all the king' son are dead: for amnon onli is
dead.

13:34 but absalom fled. and the young man that kept the watch lifted
up hi eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much peopl by the
way of the hill side behind him.

13:35 and jonadab said unto the king, behold, the king' son come: as
thi servant said, so it is.

13:36 and it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking,
that, behold, the king' son came, and lift up their voic and
wept: and the king also and all hi servant wept veri sore.

13:37 but absalom fled, and went to talmai, the son of ammihud, king
of geshur. and david mourn for hi son everi day.

13:38 So absalom fled, and went to geshur, and wa there three years.

13:39 and the soul of king david long to go forth unto absalom: for
h wa comfort concern amnon, see he wa dead.

14:1 now joab the son of zeruiah perceiv that the king' heart was
toward absalom.

14:2 and joab sent to tekoah, and fetch thenc a wise woman, and
said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on
now mourn apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a
woman that had a long time mourn for the dead: 14:3 and come to the
king, and speak on thi manner unto him. So joab put the word in her
mouth.

14:4 and when the woman of tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her
fac to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, help, O king.

14:5 and the king said unto her, what aileth thee? and she answered, i
am inde a widow woman, and mine husband is dead.

14:6 and thi handmaid had two sons, and they two strove togeth in
th field, and there wa none to part them, but the one smote the
other, and slew him.

14:7 and, behold, the whole famili is risen against thine handmaid,
and they said, deliv him that smote hi brother, that we may kill
him, for the life of hi brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the
heir also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall
not leav to my husband neither name nor remaind upon the earth.

14:8 and the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will
giv charg concern thee.

14:9 and the woman of tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the
iniqu be on me, and on my father' house: and the king and his
thron be guiltless.

14:10 and the king said, whoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to
me, and he shall not touch thee ani more.

14:11 then said she, I pray thee, let the king rememb the lord thy
god, that thou wouldest not suffer the reveng of blood to destroy
ani more, lest they destroy my son. and he said, As the lord liveth,
ther shall not one hair of thi son fall to the earth.

14:12 then the woman said, let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one
word unto my lord the king. and he said, say on.

14:13 and the woman said, wherefor then hast thou thought such a
th against the peopl of god? for the king doth speak thi thing as
on which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his
banished.

14:14 for we must need die, and are as water spilt on the ground,
which cannot be gather up again; neither doth god respect any
person: yet doth he devis means, that hi banish be not expelled
from him.

14:15 now therefor that I am come to speak of thi thing unto my lord
th king, it is becaus the peopl have made me afraid: and thy
handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king
wil perform the request of hi handmaid.

14:16 for the king will hear, to deliv hi handmaid out of the hand
of the man that would destroy me and my son togeth out of the
inherit of god.

14:17 then thine handmaid said, the word of my lord the king shall now
b comfortable: for as an angel of god, so is my lord the king to
discern good and bad: therefor the lord thi god will be with thee.

14:18 then the king answer and said unto the woman, hide not from
me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. and the woman said,
let my lord the king now speak.

14:19 and the king said, Is not the hand of joab with thee in all
this?  and the woman answer and said, As thi soul liveth, my lord
th king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought
that my lord the king hath spoken: for thi servant joab, he bade me,
and he put all these word in the mouth of thine handmaid: 14:20 to
fetch about thi form of speech hath thi servant joab done thi thing:
and my lord is wise, accord to the wisdom of an angel of god, to
know all thing that are in the earth.

14:21 and the king said unto joab, behold now, I have done thi thing:
go therefore, bring the young man absalom again.

14:22 and joab fell to the ground on hi face, and bow himself, and
thank the king: and joab said, To day thi servant knoweth that i
hav found grace in thi sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath
fulfil the request of hi servant.

14:23 So joab aros and went to geshur, and brought absalom to
jerusalem.

14:24 and the king said, let him turn to hi own house, and let him
not see my face. So absalom return to hi own house, and saw not the
king' face.

14:25 but in all israel there wa none to be so much prais as
absalom for hi beauty: from the sole of hi foot even to the crown of
hi head there wa no blemish in him.

14:26 and when he poll hi head, (for it wa at everi year' end
that he poll it: becaus the hair wa heavi on him, therefor he
pol it:) he weigh the hair of hi head at two hundr shekels
aft the king' weight.

14:27 and unto absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter,
whos name wa tamar: she wa a woman of a fair countenance.

14:28 So absalom dwelt two full year in jerusalem, and saw not the
king' face.

14:29 therefor absalom sent for joab, to have sent him to the king;
but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time,
h would not come.

14:30 therefor he said unto hi servants, see, joab' field is near
mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. and absalom's
serv set the field on fire.

14:31 then joab arose, and came to absalom unto hi house, and said
unto him, wherefor have thi servant set my field on fire?  14:32 and
absalom answer joab, behold, I sent unto thee, saying, come hither,
that I may send thee to the king, to say, wherefor am I come from
geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now
therefor let me see the king' face; and if there be ani iniqu in
me, let him kill me.

14:33 So joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called
for absalom, he came to the king, and bow himself on hi face to the
ground befor the king: and the king kiss absalom.

15:1 and it came to pass after this, that absalom prepar him
chariot and horses, and fifti men to run befor him.

15:2 and absalom rose up early, and stood besid the way of the gate:
and it wa so, that when ani man that had a controversi came to the
k for judgment, then absalom call unto him, and said, Of what
citi art thou? and he said, thi servant is of one of the tribe of
israel.

15:3 and absalom said unto him, see, thi matter are good and right;
but there is no man deput of the king to hear thee.

15:4 absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judg in the land,
that everi man which hath ani suit or caus might come unto me, and i
would do him justice!  15:5 and it wa so, that when ani man came nigh
to him to do him obeisance, he put forth hi hand, and took him, and
kiss him.

15:6 and on thi manner did absalom to all israel that came to the
k for judgment: so absalom stole the heart of the men of israel.

15:7 and it came to pass after forti years, that absalom said unto the
king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vow unto
th lord, in hebron.

15:8 for thi servant vow a vow while I abod at geshur in syria,
saying, If the lord shall bring me again inde to jerusalem, then i
wil serv the lord.

15:9 and the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to
hebron.

15:10 but absalom sent spi throughout all the tribe of israel,
saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall
say, absalom reigneth in hebron.

15:11 and with absalom went two hundr men out of jerusalem, that
wer called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any
thing.

15:12 and absalom sent for ahithophel the gilonite, david's
counsellor, from hi city, even from giloh, while he offered
sacrifices. and the conspiraci wa strong; for the peopl increased
continu with absalom.

15:13 and there came a messeng to david, saying, the heart of the
men of israel are after absalom.

15:14 and david said unto all hi servant that were with him at
jerusalem, arise, and let us flee; for we shall not els escap from
absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtak us suddenly, and bring
evil upon us, and smite the citi with the edg of the sword.

15:15 and the king' servant said unto the king, behold, thi servants
ar readi to do whatsoev my lord the king shall appoint.

15:16 and the king went forth, and all hi household after him. and
th king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.

15:17 and the king went forth, and all the peopl after him, and
tarri in a place that wa far off.

15:18 and all hi servant pass on besid him; and all the
cherethites, and all the pelethites, and all the gittites, six hundred
men which came after him from gath, pass on befor the king.

15:19 then said the king to ittai the gittite, wherefor goest thou
also with us? return to thi place, and abid with the king: for thou
art a stranger, and also an exile.

15:20 wherea thou camest but yesterday, should I thi day make thee
go up and down with us? see I go whither I may, return thou, and
tak back thi brethren: merci and truth be with thee.

15:21 and ittai answer the king, and said, As the lord liveth, and
a my lord the king liveth, sure in what place my lord the king
shal be, whether in death or life, even there also will thi servant
be.

15:22 and david said to ittai, Go and pass over. and ittai the gittite
pass over, and all hi men, and all the littl one that were with
him.

15:23 and all the countri wept with a loud voice, and all the people
pass over: the king also himself pass over the brook kidron, and
al the peopl pass over, toward the way of the wilderness.

15:24 and lo zadok also, and all the levit were with him, bearing
th ark of the coven of god: and they set down the ark of god; and
abiathar went up, until all the peopl had done pass out of the
city.

15:25 and the king said unto zadok, carri back the ark of god into the
city: if I shall find favour in the eye of the lord, he will bring me
again, and shew me both it, and hi habitation: 15:26 but if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him.

15:27 the king said also unto zadok the priest, art not thou a seer?
return into the citi in peace, and your two son with you, ahimaaz thy
son, and jonathan the son of abiathar.

15:28 see, I will tarri in the plain of the wilderness, until there
com word from you to certifi me.

15:29 zadok therefor and abiathar carri the ark of god again to
jerusalem: and they tarri there.

15:30 and david went up by the ascent of mount olivet, and wept as he
went up, and had hi head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the
peopl that wa with him cover everi man hi head, and they went up,
weep as they went up.

15:31 and one told david, saying, ahithophel is among the conspirators
with absalom. and david said, O lord, I pray thee, turn the counsel of
ahithophel into foolishness.

15:32 and it came to pass, that when david wa come to the top of the
mount, where he worship god, behold, hushai the archit came to
meet him with hi coat rent, and earth upon hi head: 15:33 unto whom
david said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden
unto me: 15:34 but if thou return to the city, and say unto absalom, i
wil be thi servant, O king; as I have been thi father' servant
hitherto, so will I now also be thi servant: then mayest thou for me
defeat the counsel of ahithophel.

15:35 and hast thou not there with thee zadok and abiathar the
priests?  therefor it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt
hear out of the king' house, thou shalt tell it to zadok and abiathar
th priests.

15:36 behold, they have there with them their two sons, ahimaaz
zadok' son, and jonathan abiathar' son; and by them ye shall send
unto me everi thing that ye can hear.

15:37 So hushai david' friend came into the city, and absalom came
into jerusalem.

16:1 and when david wa a littl past the top of the hill, behold,
ziba the servant of mephibosheth met him, with a coupl of asses
saddled, and upon them two hundr loav of bread, and an hundred
bunch of raisins, and an hundr of summer fruits, and a bottl of
wine.

16:2 and the king said unto ziba, what meanest thou by these? and ziba
said, the ass be for the king' household to ride on; and the bread
and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as
b faint in the wilder may drink.

16:3 and the king said, and where is thi master' son? and ziba said
unto the king, behold, he abideth at jerusalem: for he said, To day
shal the hous of israel restor me the kingdom of my father.

16:4 then said the king to ziba, behold, thine are all that pertained
unto mephibosheth. and ziba said, I humbl beseech thee that I may
find grace in thi sight, my lord, O king.

16:5 and when king david came to bahurim, behold, thenc came out a
man of the famili of the hous of saul, whose name wa shimei, the son
of gera: he came forth, and curs still as he came.

16:6 and he cast stone at david, and at all the servant of king
david: and all the peopl and all the mighti men were on hi right
hand and on hi left.

16:7 and thu said shimei when he cursed, come out, come out, thou
bloodi man, and thou man of belial: 16:8 the lord hath return upon
the all the blood of the hous of saul, in whose stead thou hast
reigned; and the lord hath deliv the kingdom into the hand of
absalom thi son: and, behold, thou art taken in thi mischief, because
th art a bloodi man.

16:9 then said abishai the son of zeruiah unto the king, whi should
thi dead dog curs my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and
tak off hi head.

16:10 and the king said, what have I to do with you, ye son of
zeruiah?  so let him curse, becaus the lord hath said unto him, curse
david. who shall then say, wherefor hast thou done so?  16:11 and
david said to abishai, and to all hi servants, behold, my son, which
cam forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this
benjamit do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the lord hath
bidden him.

16:12 It may be that the lord will look on mine affliction, and that
th lord will requit me good for hi curs thi day.

16:13 and as david and hi men went by the way, shimei went along on
th hill' side over against him, and curs as he went, and threw
ston at him, and cast dust.

16:14 and the king, and all the peopl that were with him, came weary,
and refresh themselv there.

16:15 and absalom, and all the peopl the men of israel, came to
jerusalem, and ahithophel with him.

16:16 and it came to pass, when hushai the archite, david' friend,
wa come unto absalom, that hushai said unto absalom, god save the
king, god save the king.

16:17 and absalom said to hushai, Is thi thi kind to thi friend?
whi wentest thou not with thi friend?  16:18 and hushai said unto
absalom, nay; but whom the lord, and thi people, and all the men of
israel, choose, hi will I be, and with him will I abide.

16:19 and again, whom should I serve? should I not serv in the
pres of hi son? as I have serv in thi father' presence, so
wil I be in thi presence.

16:20 then said absalom to ahithophel, give counsel among you what we
shal do.

16:21 and ahithophel said unto absalom, Go in unto thi father's
concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all israel shall
hear that thou art abhor of thi father: then shall the hand of all
that are with thee be strong.

16:22 So they spread absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and
absalom went in unto hi father' concubin in the sight of all
israel.

16:23 and the counsel of ahithophel, which he counsel in those
days, wa as if a man had enquir at the oracl of god: so wa all
th counsel of ahithophel both with david and with absalom.

17:1 moreov ahithophel said unto absalom, let me now choos out
twelv thousand men, and I will aris and pursu after david this
night: 17:2 and I will come upon him while he is weari and weak
handed, and will make him afraid: and all the peopl that are with him
shal flee; and I will smite the king only: 17:3 and I will bring back
al the peopl unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all
returned: so all the peopl shall be in peace.

17:4 and the say pleas absalom well, and all the elder of
israel.

17:5 then said absalom, call now hushai the archit also, and let us
hear likewis what he saith.

17:6 and when hushai wa come to absalom, absalom spake unto him,
saying, ahithophel hath spoken after thi manner: shall we do after
hi saying? if not; speak thou.

17:7 and hushai said unto absalom, the counsel that ahithophel hath
given is not good at thi time.

17:8 for, said hushai, thou knowest thi father and hi men, that they
b mighti men, and they be chafe in their minds, as a bear rob of
her whelp in the field: and thi father is a man of war, and will not
lodg with the people.

17:9 behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it
wil come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that
whosoev heareth it will say, there is a slaughter among the people
that follow absalom.

17:10 and he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a
lion, shall utterli melt: for all israel knoweth that thi father is a
mighti man, and they which be with him are valiant men.

17:11 therefor I counsel that all israel be gener gather unto
thee, from dan even to beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for
multitude; and that thou go to battl in thine own person.

17:12 So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found,
and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of
him and of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so
much as one.

17:13 moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all israel
br rope to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until
ther be not one small stone found there.

17:14 and absalom and all the men of israel said, the counsel of
hushai the archit is better than the counsel of ahithophel. for the
lord had appoint to defeat the good counsel of ahithophel, to the
int that the lord might bring evil upon absalom.

17:15 then said hushai unto zadok and to abiathar the priests, thus
and thu did ahithophel counsel absalom and the elder of israel; and
thu and thu have I counselled.

17:16 now therefor send quickly, and tell david, saying, lodg not
thi night in the plain of the wilderness, but speedili pass over;
lest the king be swallow up, and all the peopl that are with him.

17:17 now jonathan and ahimaaz stay by enrogel; for they might not
b seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and
they went and told king david.

17:18 nevertheless a lad saw them, and told absalom: but they went
both of them away quickly, and came to a man' hous in bahurim, which
had a well in hi court; whither they went down.

17:19 and the woman took and spread a cover over the well' mouth,
and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing wa not known.

17:20 and when absalom' servant came to the woman to the house, they
said, where is ahimaaz and jonathan? and the woman said unto them,
they be gone over the brook of water. and when they had sought and
could not find them, they return to jerusalem.

17:21 and it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up
out of the well, and went and told king david, and said unto david,
arise, and pass quickli over the water: for thu hath ahithophel
counsel against you.

17:22 then david arose, and all the peopl that were with him, and
they pass over jordan: by the morn light there lack not one of
them that wa not gone over jordan.

17:23 and when ahithophel saw that hi counsel wa not followed, he
saddl hi ass, and arose, and gat him home to hi house, to his
city, and put hi household in order, and hang himself, and died,
and wa buri in the sepulchr of hi father.

17:24 then david came to mahanaim. and absalom pass over jordan, he
and all the men of israel with him.

17:25 and absalom made amasa captain of the host instead of joab:
which amasa wa a man' son, whose name wa ithra an israelite, that
went in to abigail the daughter of nahash, sister to zeruiah joab's
mother.

17:26 So israel and absalom pitch in the land of gilead.

17:27 and it came to pass, when david wa come to mahanaim, that shobi
th son of nahash of rabbah of the children of ammon, and machir the
son of ammiel of lodebar, and barzillai the gileadit of rogelim,
17:28 brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and
barley, and flour, and parch corn, and beans, and lentiles, and
parch pulse, 17:29 and honey, and butter, and sheep, and chees of
kine, for david, and for the peopl that were with him, to eat: for
they said, the peopl is hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the
wilderness.

18:1 and david number the peopl that were with him, and set
captain of thousands, and captain of hundr over them.

18:2 and david sent forth a third part of the peopl under the hand of
joab, and a third part under the hand of abishai the son of zeruiah,
joab' brother, and a third part under the hand of ittai the gittite.
and the king said unto the people, I will sure go forth with you
myself also.

18:3 but the peopl answered, thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee
away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they
car for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefor now
it is better that thou succour us out of the city.

18:4 and the king said unto them, what seemeth you best I will do. and
th king stood by the gate side, and all the peopl came out by
hundr and by thousands.

18:5 and the king command joab and abishai and ittai, saying, deal
gent for my sake with the young man, even with absalom. and all the
peopl heard when the king gave all the captain charg concerning
absalom.

18:6 So the peopl went out into the field against israel: and the
battl wa in the wood of ephraim; 18:7 where the peopl of israel
wer slain befor the servant of david, and there wa there a great
slaught that day of twenti thousand men.

18:8 for the battl wa there scatter over the face of all the
country: and the wood devour more peopl that day than the sword
devoured.

18:9 and absalom met the servant of david. and absalom rode upon a
mule, and the mule went under the thick bough of a great oak, and his
head caught hold of the oak, and he wa taken up between the heaven
and the earth; and the mule that wa under him went away.

18:10 and a certain man saw it, and told joab, and said, behold, I saw
absalom hang in an oak.

18:11 and joab said unto the man that told him, and, behold, thou
sawest him, and whi didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and
i would have given thee ten shekel of silver, and a girdle.

18:12 and the man said unto joab, though I should receiv a thousand
shekel of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand
against the king' son: for in our hear the king charg thee and
abishai and ittai, saying, bewar that none touch the young man
absalom.

18:13 otherwis I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life:
for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest
hav set thyself against me.

18:14 then said joab, I may not tarri thu with thee. and he took
thre dart in hi hand, and thrust them through the heart of absalom,
whil he wa yet aliv in the midst of the oak.

18:15 and ten young men that bare joab' armour compass about and
smot absalom, and slew him.

18:16 and joab blew the trumpet, and the peopl return from pursuing
aft israel: for joab held back the people.

18:17 and they took absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the
wood, and laid a veri great heap of stone upon him: and all israel
fl everi one to hi tent.

18:18 now absalom in hi lifetim had taken and rear up for himself
a pillar, which is in the king' dale: for he said, I have no son to
keep my name in remembrance: and he call the pillar after hi own
name: and it is call unto thi day, absalom' place.

18:19 then said ahimaaz the son of zadok, let me now run, and bear the
k tidings, how that the lord hath aveng him of hi enemies.

18:20 and joab said unto him, thou shalt not bear tide thi day,
but thou shalt bear tide anoth day: but thi day thou shalt bear
no tidings, becaus the king' son is dead.

18:21 then said joab to cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen.
and cushi bow himself unto joab, and ran.

18:22 then said ahimaaz the son of zadok yet again to joab, but
howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after cushi. and joab said,
wherefor wilt thou run, my son, see that thou hast no tidings
ready?  18:23 but howsoever, said he, let me run. and he said unto
him, run. then ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran cushi.

18:24 and david sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to
th roof over the gate unto the wall, and lift up hi eyes, and
looked, and behold a man run alone.

18:25 and the watchman cried, and told the king. and the king said, if
h be alone, there is tide in hi mouth. and he came apace, and
drew near.

18:26 and the watchman saw anoth man running: and the watchman
cal unto the porter, and said, behold anoth man run alone.
and the king said, He also bringeth tidings.

18:27 and the watchman said, Me thinketh the run of the foremost
i like the run of ahimaaz the son of zadok. and the king said, he
i a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

18:28 and ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, all is well. and he
fel down to the earth upon hi face befor the king, and said,
bless be the lord thi god, which hath deliv up the men that
lift up their hand against my lord the king.

18:29 and the king said, Is the young man absalom safe? and ahimaaz
answered, when joab sent the king' servant, and me thi servant, I saw
a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.

18:30 and the king said unto him, turn aside, and stand here. and he
turn aside, and stood still.

18:31 and, behold, cushi came; and cushi said, tidings, my lord the
king: for the lord hath aveng thee thi day of all them that rose up
against thee.

18:32 and the king said unto cushi, Is the young man absalom safe? and
cushi answered, the enemi of my lord the king, and all that rise
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

18:33 and the king wa much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept: and as he went, thu he said, O my son absalom, my
son, my son absalom! would god I had die for thee, O absalom, my son,
mi son!  19:1 and it wa told joab, behold, the king weepeth and
mourneth for absalom.

19:2 and the victori that day wa turn into mourn unto all the
people: for the peopl heard say that day how the king wa griev for
hi son.

19:3 and the peopl gat them by stealth that day into the city, as
peopl be asham steal away when they flee in battle.

19:4 but the king cover hi face, and the king cri with a loud
voice, O my son absalom, O absalom, my son, my son!  19:5 and joab
cam into the hous to the king, and said, thou hast shame thi day
th face of all thi servants, which thi day have save thi life, and
th live of thi son and of thi daughters, and the live of thy
wives, and the live of thi concubines; 19:6 In that thou lovest thine
enemies, and hatest thi friends. for thou hast declar thi day, that
thou regardest neither princ nor servants: for thi day I perceive,
that if absalom had lived, and all we had die thi day, then it had
pleas thee well.

19:7 now therefor arise, go forth, and speak comfort unto thy
servants: for I swear by the lord, if thou go not forth, there will
not tarri one with thee thi night: and that will be wors unto thee
than all the evil that befel thee from thi youth until now.

19:8 then the king arose, and sat in the gate. and they told unto all
th people, saying, behold, the king doth sit in the gate. and all the
peopl came befor the king: for israel had fled everi man to his
tent.

19:9 and all the peopl were at strife throughout all the tribe of
israel, saying, the king save us out of the hand of our enemies, and
h deliv us out of the hand of the philistines; and now he is fled
out of the land for absalom.

19:10 and absalom, whom we anoint over us, is dead in battle. now
therefor whi speak ye not a word of bring the king back?  19:11
and king david sent to zadok and to abiathar the priests, saying,
speak unto the elder of judah, saying, whi are ye the last to bring
th king back to hi house? see the speech of all israel is come to
th king, even to hi house.

19:12 Ye are my brethren, ye are my bone and my flesh: wherefor then
ar ye the last to bring back the king?  19:13 and say ye to amasa,
art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? god do so to me, and more
also, if thou be not captain of the host befor me continu in the
room of joab.

19:14 and he bow the heart of all the men of judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent thi word unto the king, return
thou, and all thi servants.

19:15 So the king returned, and came to jordan. and judah came to
gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over jordan.

19:16 and shimei the son of gera, a benjamite, which wa of bahurim,
hast and came down with the men of judah to meet king david.

19:17 and there were a thousand men of benjamin with him, and ziba the
serv of the hous of saul, and hi fifteen son and hi twenty
serv with him; and they went over jordan befor the king.

19:18 and there went over a ferri boat to carri over the king's
household, and to do what he thought good. and shimei the son of gera
fel down befor the king, as he wa come over jordan; 19:19 and said
unto the king, let not my lord imput iniqu unto me, neither do
thou rememb that which thi servant did pervers the day that my
lord the king went out of jerusalem, that the king should take it to
hi heart.

19:20 for thi servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold,
i am come the first thi day of all the hous of joseph to go down to
meet my lord the king.

19:21 but abishai the son of zeruiah answer and said, shall not
shimei be put to death for this, becaus he curs the lord's
anointed?  19:22 and david said, what have I to do with you, ye sons
of zeruiah, that ye should thi day be adversari unto me? shall
ther ani man be put to death thi day in israel? for do not I know
that I am thi day king over israel?  19:23 therefor the king said
unto shimei, thou shalt not die. and the king sware unto him.

19:24 and mephibosheth the son of saul came down to meet the king, and
had neither dress hi feet, nor trim hi beard, nor wash his
clothes, from the day the king depart until the day he came again in
peace.

19:25 and it came to pass, when he wa come to jerusalem to meet the
king, that the king said unto him, wherefor wentest not thou with me,
mephibosheth?  19:26 and he answered, My lord, O king, my servant
deceiv me: for thi servant said, I will saddl me an ass, that I may
rid thereon, and go to the king; becaus thi servant is lame.

19:27 and he hath slander thi servant unto my lord the king; but my
lord the king is as an angel of god: do therefor what is good in
thin eyes.

19:28 for all of my father' hous were but dead men befor my lord
th king: yet didst thou set thi servant among them that did eat at
thin own table. what right therefor have I yet to cri ani more unto
th king?  19:29 and the king said unto him, whi speakest thou any
mor of thi matters? I have said, thou and ziba divid the land.

19:30 and mephibosheth said unto the king, yea, let him take all,
forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peac unto hi own
house.

19:31 and barzillai the gileadit came down from rogelim, and went
ov jordan with the king, to conduct him over jordan.

19:32 now barzillai wa a veri age man, even fourscor year old: and
h had provid the king of susten while he lay at mahanaim; for
h wa a veri great man.

19:33 and the king said unto barzillai, come thou over with me, and i
wil feed thee with me in jerusalem.

19:34 and barzillai said unto the king, how long have I to live, that
i should go up with the king unto jerusalem?  19:35 I am thi day
fourscor year old: and can I discern between good and evil? can thy
serv tast what I eat or what I drink? can I hear ani more the
voic of sing men and sing women? wherefor then should thy
serv be yet a burden unto my lord the king?  19:36 thi servant will
go a littl way over jordan with the king: and whi should the king
recompens it me with such a reward?  19:37 let thi servant, I pray
thee, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, and be buried
bi the grave of my father and of my mother. but behold thi servant
chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what
shal seem good unto thee.

19:38 and the king answered, chimham shall go over with me, and I will
do to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoev thou
shalt requir of me, that will I do for thee.

19:39 and all the peopl went over jordan. and when the king wa come
over, the king kiss barzillai, and bless him; and he return unto
hi own place.

19:40 then the king went on to gilgal, and chimham went on with him:
and all the peopl of judah conduct the king, and also half the
peopl of israel.

19:41 and, behold, all the men of israel came to the king, and said
unto the king, whi have our brethren the men of judah stolen thee
away, and have brought the king, and hi household, and all david's
men with him, over jordan?  19:42 and all the men of judah answered
th men of israel, becaus the king is near of kin to us: wherefore
then be ye angri for thi matter? have we eaten at all of the king's
cost? or hath he given us ani gift?  19:43 and the men of israel
answ the men of judah, and said, We have ten part in the king,
and we have also more right in david than ye: whi then did ye despise
us, that our advic should not be first had in bring back our king?
and the word of the men of judah were fiercer than the word of the
men of israel.

20:1 and there happen to be there a man of belial, whose name was
sheba, the son of bichri, a benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and
said, We have no part in david, neither have we inherit in the son
of jesse: everi man to hi tents, O israel.

20:2 So everi man of israel went up from after david, and followed
sheba the son of bichri: but the men of judah clave unto their king,
from jordan even to jerusalem.

20:3 and david came to hi hous at jerusalem; and the king took the
ten women hi concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put
them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were
shut up unto the day of their death, live in widowhood.

20:4 then said the king to amasa, assembl me the men of judah within
thre days, and be thou here present.

20:5 So amasa went to assembl the men of judah: but he tarri longer
than the set time which he had appoint him.

20:6 and david said to abishai, now shall sheba the son of bichri do
u more harm than did absalom: take thou thi lord' servants, and
pursu after him, lest he get him fenc cities, and escap us.

20:7 and there went out after him joab' men, and the cherethites, and
th pelethites, and all the mighti men: and they went out of
jerusalem, to pursu after sheba the son of bichri.

20:8 when they were at the great stone which is in gibeon, amasa went
befor them. and joab' garment that he had put on wa gird unto
him, and upon it a girdl with a sword fasten upon hi loin in the
sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.

20:9 and joab said to amasa, art thou in health, my brother? and joab
took amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.

20:10 but amasa took no heed to the sword that wa in joab' hand: so
h smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out hi bowel to
th ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So joab and abishai
hi brother pursu after sheba the son of bichri.

20:11 and one of joab' men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth
joab, and he that is for david, let him go after joab.

20:12 and amasa wallow in blood in the midst of the highway. and
when the man saw that all the peopl stood still, he remov amasa out
of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw
that everi one that came by him stood still.

20:13 when he wa remov out of the highway, all the peopl went on
aft joab, to pursu after sheba the son of bichri.

20:14 and he went through all the tribe of israel unto abel, and to
bethmaachah, and all the berites: and they were gather together, and
went also after him.

20:15 and they came and besieg him in abel of bethmaachah, and they
cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all
th peopl that were with joab batter the wall, to throw it down.

20:16 then cri a wise woman out of the city, hear, hear; say, I pray
you, unto joab, come near hither, that I may speak with thee.

20:17 and when he wa come near unto her, the woman said, art thou
joab?  and he answered, I am he. then she said unto him, hear the
word of thine handmaid. and he answered, I do hear.

20:18 then she spake, saying, they were wont to speak in old time,
saying, they shall sure ask counsel at abel: and so they end the
matter.

20:19 I am one of them that are peaceabl and faith in israel: thou
seekest to destroy a citi and a mother in israel: whi wilt thou
swallow up the inherit of the lord?  20:20 and joab answer and
said, far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or
destroy.

20:21 the matter is not so: but a man of mount ephraim, sheba the son
of bichri by name, hath lift up hi hand against the king, even
against david: deliv him only, and I will depart from the city. and
th woman said unto joab, behold, hi head shall be thrown to thee
ov the wall.

20:22 then the woman went unto all the peopl in her wisdom. and they
cut off the head of sheba the son of bichri, and cast it out to joab.
and he blew a trumpet, and they retir from the city, everi man to
hi tent. and joab return to jerusalem unto the king.

20:23 now joab wa over all the host of israel: and benaiah the son of
jehoiada wa over the cherethit and over the pelethites: 20:24 and
adoram wa over the tribute: and jehoshaphat the son of ahilud was
recorder: 20:25 and sheva wa scribe: and zadok and abiathar were the
priests: 20:26 and ira also the jairit wa a chief ruler about david.

21:1 then there wa a famin in the day of david three years, year
aft year; and david enquir of the lord. and the lord answered, it
i for saul, and for hi bloodi house, becaus he slew the gibeonites.

21:2 and the king call the gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the
gibeonit were not of the children of israel, but of the remnant of
th amorites; and the children of israel had sworn unto them: and saul
sought to slay them in hi zeal to the children of israel and judah.)
21:3 wherefor david said unto the gibeonites, what shall I do for
you?  and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the
inherit of the lord?  21:4 and the gibeonit said unto him, we
wil have no silver nor gold of saul, nor of hi house; neither for us
shalt thou kill ani man in israel. and he said, what ye shall say,
that will I do for you.

21:5 and they answer the king, the man that consum us, and that
devis against us that we should be destroy from remain in any
of the coast of israel, 21:6 let seven men of hi son be delivered
unto us, and we will hang them up unto the lord in gibeah of saul,
whom the lord did choose. and the king said, I will give them.

21:7 but the king spare mephibosheth, the son of jonathan the son of
saul, becaus of the lord' oath that wa between them, between david
and jonathan the son of saul.

21:8 but the king took the two son of rizpah the daughter of aiah,
whom she bare unto saul, armoni and mephibosheth; and the five son of
mich the daughter of saul, whom she brought up for adriel the son of
barzillai the meholathite: 21:9 and he deliv them into the hands
of the gibeonites, and they hang them in the hill befor the lord:
and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the day of
harvest, in the first days, in the begin of barley harvest.

21:10 and rizpah the daughter of aiah took sackcloth, and spread it
for her upon the rock, from the begin of harvest until water
drop upon them out of heaven, and suffer neither the bird of the
air to rest on them by day, nor the beast of the field by night.

21:11 and it wa told david what rizpah the daughter of aiah, the
concubin of saul, had done.

21:12 and david went and took the bone of saul and the bone of
jonathan hi son from the men of jabeshgilead, which had stolen them
from the street of bethshan, where the philistin had hang them,
when the philistin had slain saul in gilboa: 21:13 and he brought up
from thenc the bone of saul and the bone of jonathan hi son; and
they gather the bone of them that were hanged.

21:14 and the bone of saul and jonathan hi son buri they in the
countri of benjamin in zelah, in the sepulchr of kish hi father: and
they perform all that the king commanded. and after that god was
intr for the land.

21:15 moreov the philistin had yet war again with israel; and
david went down, and hi servant with him, and fought against the
philistines: and david wax faint.

21:16 and ishbibenob, which wa of the son of the giant, the weight
of whose spear weigh three hundr shekel of brass in weight, he
b gird with a new sword, thought to have slain david.

21:17 but abishai the son of zeruiah succour him, and smote the
philistine, and kill him. then the men of david sware unto him,
saying, thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench
not the light of israel.

21:18 and it came to pass after this, that there wa again a battle
with the philistin at gob: then sibbechai the hushathit slew saph,
which wa of the son of the giant.

21:19 and there wa again a battl in gob with the philistines, where
elhanan the son of jaareoregim, a bethlehemite, slew the brother of
goliath the gittite, the staff of whose spear wa like a weaver's
beam.

21:20 and there wa yet a battl in gath, where wa a man of great
stature, that had on everi hand six fingers, and on everi foot six
toes, four and twenti in number; and he also wa born to the giant.

21:21 and when he defi israel, jonathan the son of shimeah the
broth of david slew him.

21:22 these four were born to the giant in gath, and fell by the hand
of david, and by the hand of hi servants.

22:1 and david spake unto the lord the word of thi song in the day
that the lord had deliv him out of the hand of all hi enemies,
and out of the hand of saul: 22:2 and he said, the lord is my rock,
and my fortress, and my deliverer; 22:3 the god of my rock; in him
wil I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high
tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.

22:4 I will call on the lord, who is worthi to be praised: so shall i
b save from mine enemies.

22:5 when the wave of death compass me, the flood of ungodli men
mad me afraid; 22:6 the sorrow of hell compass me about; the
snar of death prevent me; 22:7 In my distress I call upon the
lord, and cri to my god: and he did hear my voic out of hi temple,
and my cri did enter into hi ears.

22:8 then the earth shook and trembled; the foundat of heaven
mov and shook, becaus he wa wroth.

22:9 there went up a smoke out of hi nostrils, and fire out of his
mouth devoured: coal were kindl by it.

22:10 He bow the heaven also, and came down; and dark wa under
hi feet.

22:11 and he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he wa seen upon the
w of the wind.

22:12 and he made dark pavilion round about him, dark waters, and
thick cloud of the skies.

22:13 through the bright befor him were coal of fire kindled.

22:14 the lord thunder from heaven, and the most high utter his
voice.

22:15 and he sent out arrows, and scatter them; lightning, and
discomfit them.

22:16 and the channel of the sea appeared, the foundat of the
world were discovered, at the rebuk of the lord, at the blast of
th breath of hi nostrils.

22:17 He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of mani waters;
22:18 He deliv me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated
me: for they were too strong for me.

22:19 they prevent me in the day of my calamity: but the lord wa my
stay.

22:20 He brought me forth also into a larg place: he deliv me,
becaus he delight in me.

22:21 the lord reward me accord to my righteousness: accord to
th clean of my hand hath he recompens me.

22:22 for I have kept the way of the lord, and have not wickedly
depart from my god.

22:23 for all hi judgment were befor me: and as for hi statutes, i
did not depart from them.

22:24 I wa also upright befor him, and have kept myself from mine
iniquity.

22:25 therefor the lord hath recompens me accord to my
righteousness; accord to my clean in hi eye sight.

22:26 with the merci thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the
upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.

22:27 with the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward
th wilt shew thyself unsavoury.

22:28 and the afflict peopl thou wilt save: but thine eye are upon
th haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.

22:29 for thou art my lamp, O lord: and the lord will lighten my
darkness.

22:30 for by thee I have run through a troop: by my god have I leaped
ov a wall.

22:31 As for god, hi way is perfect; the word of the lord is tried:
h is a buckler to all them that trust in him.

22:32 for who is god, save the lord? and who is a rock, save our god?
22:33 god is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.

22:34 He maketh my feet like hinds' feet: and setteth me upon my high
places.

22:35 He teacheth my hand to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by
min arms.

22:36 thou hast also given me the shield of thi salvation: and thy
gentl hath made me great.

22:37 thou hast enlarg my step under me; so that my feet did not
slip.

22:38 I have pursu mine enemies, and destroy them; and turn not
again until I had consum them.

22:39 and I have consum them, and wound them, that they could not
arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet.

22:40 for thou hast gird me with strength to battle: them that rose
up against me hast thou subdu under me.

22:41 thou hast also given me the neck of mine enemies, that I might
destroy them that hate me.

22:42 they looked, but there wa none to save; even unto the lord, but
h answer them not.

22:43 then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did
stamp them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.

22:44 thou also hast deliv me from the strive of my people,
th hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a peopl which I knew not
shal serv me.

22:45 stranger shall submit themselv unto me: as soon as they hear,
they shall be obedi unto me.

22:46 stranger shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their
clos places.

22:47 the lord liveth; and bless be my rock; and exalt be the god
of the rock of my salvation.

22:48 It is god that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people
und me.

22:49 and that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast
lift me up on high abov them that rose up against me: thou hast
deliv me from the violent man.

22:50 therefor I will give thank unto thee, O lord, among the
heathen, and I will sing prais unto thi name.

22:51 He is the tower of salvat for hi king: and sheweth merci to
hi anointed, unto david, and to hi seed for evermore.

23:1 now these be the last word of david. david the son of jesse
said, and the man who wa rais up on high, the anoint of the god
of jacob, and the sweet psalmist of israel, said, 23:2 the spirit of
th lord spake by me, and hi word wa in my tongue.

23:3 the god of israel said, the rock of israel spake to me, He that
ruleth over men must be just, rule in the fear of god.

23:4 and he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,
even a morn without clouds; as the tender grass spring out of
th earth by clear shine after rain.

23:5 although my hous be not so with god; yet he hath made with me an
everlast covenant, order in all things, and sure: for thi is all
mi salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

23:6 but the son of belial shall be all of them as thorn thrust
away, becaus they cannot be taken with hands: 23:7 but the man that
shal touch them must be fenc with iron and the staff of a spear;
and they shall be utterli burn with fire in the same place.

23:8 these be the name of the mighti men whom david had: the
tachmonit that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same
wa adino the eznite: he lift up hi spear against eight hundred, whom
h slew at one time.

23:9 and after him wa eleazar the son of dodo the ahohite, one of the
thre mighti men with david, when they defi the philistin that
wer there gather togeth to battle, and the men of israel were
gon away: 23:10 He arose, and smote the philistin until hi hand
wa weary, and hi hand clave unto the sword: and the lord wrought a
great victori that day; and the peopl return after him onli to
spoil.

23:11 and after him wa shammah the son of age the hararite. and the
philistin were gather togeth into a troop, where wa a piec of
ground full of lentiles: and the peopl fled from the philistines.

23:12 but he stood in the midst of the ground, and defend it, and
slew the philistines: and the lord wrought a great victory.

23:13 and three of the thirti chief went down, and came to david in
th harvest time unto the cave of adullam: and the troop of the
philistin pitch in the valley of rephaim.

23:14 and david wa then in an hold, and the garrison of the
philistin wa then in bethlehem.

23:15 and david longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of
th water of the well of bethlehem, which is by the gate!  23:16 and
th three mighti men brake through the host of the philistines, and
drew water out of the well of bethlehem, that wa by the gate, and
took it, and brought it to david: nevertheless he would not drink
thereof, but pour it out unto the lord.

23:17 and he said, Be it far from me, O lord, that I should do this:
i not thi the blood of the men that went in jeopardi of their lives?
therefor he would not drink it. these thing did these three mighty
men.

23:18 and abishai, the brother of joab, the son of zeruiah, wa chief
among three. and he lift up hi spear against three hundred, and
slew them, and had the name among three.

23:19 wa he not most honour of three? therefor he wa their
captain: howbeit he attain not unto the first three.

23:20 and benaiah the son of jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of
kabzeel, who had done mani acts, he slew two lionlik men of moab: he
went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:
23:21 and he slew an egyptian, a goodli man: and the egyptian had a
spear in hi hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked
th spear out of the egyptian' hand, and slew him with hi own spear.

23:22 these thing did benaiah the son of jehoiada, and had the name
among three mighti men.

23:23 He wa more honour than the thirty, but he attain not to
th first three. and david set him over hi guard.

23:24 asahel the brother of joab wa one of the thirty; elhanan the
son of dodo of bethlehem, 23:25 shammah the harodite, elika the
harodite, 23:26 helez the paltite, ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite,
23:27 abiez the anethothite, mebunnai the hushathite, 23:28 zalmon
th ahohite, maharai the netophathite, 23:29 heleb the son of baanah,
a netophathite, ittai the son of ribai out of gibeah of the children
of benjamin, 23:30 benaiah the pirathonite, hiddai of the brook of
gaash, 23:31 abialbon the arbathite, azmaveth the barhumite, 23:32
eliahba the shaalbonite, of the son of jashen, jonathan, 23:33
shammah the hararite, ahiam the son of sharar the hararite, 23:34
eliphelet the son of ahasbai, the son of the maachathite, eliam the
son of ahithophel the gilonite, 23:35 hezrai the carmelite, paarai the
arbite, 23:36 igal the son of nathan of zobah, bani the gadite, 23:37
zelek the ammonite, nahari the beerothite, armourbear to joab the
son of zeruiah, 23:38 ira an ithrite, gareb an ithrite, 23:39 uriah
th hittite: thirti and seven in all.

24:1 and again the anger of the lord wa kindl against israel, and
h move david against them to say, go, number israel and judah.

24:2 for the king said to joab the captain of the host, which wa with
him, Go now through all the tribe of israel, from dan even to
beersheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the
people.

24:3 and joab said unto the king, now the lord thi god add unto the
people, how mani soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eye of
mi lord the king may see it: but whi doth my lord the king delight in
thi thing?  24:4 notwithstand the king' word prevail against
joab, and against the captain of the host. and joab and the captains
of the host went out from the presenc of the king, to number the
peopl of israel.

24:5 and they pass over jordan, and pitch in aroer, on the right
sid of the citi that lieth in the midst of the river of gad, and
toward jazer: 24:6 then they came to gilead, and to the land of
tahtimhodshi; and they came to danjaan, and about to zidon, 24:7 and
cam to the strong hold of tyre, and to all the citi of the hivites,
and of the canaanites: and they went out to the south of judah, even
to beersheba.

24:8 So when they had gone through all the land, they came to
jerusalem at the end of nine month and twenti days.

24:9 and joab gave up the sum of the number of the peopl unto the
king: and there were in israel eight hundr thousand valiant men that
drew the sword; and the men of judah were five hundr thousand men.

24:10 and david' heart smote him after that he had number the
people.

and david said unto the lord, I have sin greatli in that I have
done: and now, I beseech thee, O lord, take away the iniqu of thy
servant; for I have done veri foolishly.

24:11 for when david wa up in the morning, the word of the lord came
unto the prophet gad, david' seer, saying, 24:12 Go and say unto
david, thu saith the lord, I offer thee three things; choos thee one
of them, that I may do it unto thee.

24:13 So gad came to david, and told him, and said unto him, shall
seven year of famin come unto thee in thi land? or wilt thou flee
thre month befor thine enemies, while they pursu thee? or that
ther be three days' pestil in thi land? now advise, and see what
answ I shall return to him that sent me.

24:14 and david said unto gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now
into the hand of the lord; for hi merci are great: and let me not
fal into the hand of man.

24:15 So the lord sent a pestil upon israel from the morn even
to the time appointed: and there die of the peopl from dan even to
beersheba seventi thousand men.

24:16 and when the angel stretch out hi hand upon jerusalem to
destroy it, the lord repent him of the evil, and said to the angel
that destroy the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. and the
angel of the lord wa by the threshingplac of araunah the jebusite.

24:17 and david spake unto the lord when he saw the angel that smote
th people, and said, lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but
thes sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be
against me, and against my father' house.

24:18 and gad came that day to david, and said unto him, Go up, rear
an altar unto the lord in the threshingfloor of araunah the jebusite.

24:19 and david, accord to the say of gad, went up as the lord
commanded.

24:20 and araunah looked, and saw the king and hi servant come on
toward him: and araunah went out, and bow himself befor the king on
hi face upon the ground.

24:21 and araunah said, wherefor is my lord the king come to his
servant?  and david said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build
an altar unto the lord, that the plagu may be stay from the people.

24:22 and araunah said unto david, let my lord the king take and offer
up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt
sacrifice, and thresh instrument and other instrument of the oxen
for wood.

24:23 all these thing did araunah, as a king, give unto the king. and
araunah said unto the king, the lord thi god accept thee.

24:24 and the king said unto araunah, nay; but I will sure buy it of
the at a price: neither will I offer burnt offer unto the lord my
god of that which doth cost me nothing. So david bought the
threshingfloor and the oxen for fifti shekel of silver.

24:25 and david built there an altar unto the lord, and offer burnt
off and peac offerings. So the lord wa intreat for the land,
and the plagu wa stay from israel.




th first book of the kings

commonli called:

th third book of the kings


1:1 now king david wa old and stricken in years; and they covered
him with clothes, but he gat no heat.

1:2 wherefor hi servant said unto him, let there be sought for my
lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand befor the king, and
let her cherish him, and let her lie in thi bosom, that my lord the
k may get heat.

1:3 So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coast of
israel, and found abishag a shunammite, and brought her to the king.

1:4 and the damsel wa veri fair, and cherish the king, and
minist to him: but the king knew her not.

1:5 then adonijah the son of haggith exalt himself, saying, I will
b king: and he prepar him chariot and horsemen, and fifti men to
run befor him.

1:6 and hi father had not displeas him at ani time in saying, why
hast thou done so? and he also wa a veri goodli man; and hi mother
bar him after absalom.

1:7 and he confer with joab the son of zeruiah, and with abiathar
th priest: and they follow adonijah help him.

1:8 but zadok the priest, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and nathan
th prophet, and shimei, and rei, and the mighti men which belong to
david, were not with adonijah.

1:9 and adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattl by the stone of
zoheleth, which is by enrogel, and call all hi brethren the king's
sons, and all the men of judah the king' servants: 1:10 but nathan
th prophet, and benaiah, and the mighti men, and solomon hi brother,
h call not.

1:11 wherefor nathan spake unto bathsheba the mother of solomon,
saying, hast thou not heard that adonijah the son of haggith doth
reign, and david our lord knoweth it not?  1:12 now therefor come,
let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine
own life, and the life of thi son solomon.

1:13 Go and get thee in unto king david, and say unto him, didst not
thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, assuredly
solomon thi son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
whi then doth adonijah reign?  1:14 behold, while thou yet talkest
ther with the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy
words.

1:15 and bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the
k wa veri old; and abishag the shunammit minist unto the
king.

1:16 and bathsheba bowed, and did obeis unto the king. and the
k said, what wouldest thou?  1:17 and she said unto him, My lord,
thou swarest by the lord thi god unto thine handmaid, saying,
assuredli solomon thi son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
mi throne.

1:18 and now, behold, adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king,
thou knowest it not: 1:19 and he hath slain oxen and fat cattl and
sheep in abundance, and hath call all the son of the king, and
abiathar the priest, and joab the captain of the host: but solomon thy
serv hath he not called.

1:20 and thou, my lord, O king, the eye of all israel are upon thee,
that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord
th king after him.

1:21 otherwis it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall
sleep with hi fathers, that I and my son solomon shall be counted
offenders.

1:22 and, lo, while she yet talk with the king, nathan the prophet
also came in.

1:23 and they told the king, saying, behold nathan the prophet. and
when he wa come in befor the king, he bow himself befor the king
with hi face to the ground.

1:24 and nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, adonijah shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?  1:25 for he is gone
down thi day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattl and sheep in
abundance, and hath call all the king' sons, and the captain of
th host, and abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink
befor him, and say, god save king adonijah.

1:26 but me, even me thi servant, and zadok the priest, and benaiah
th son of jehoiada, and thi servant solomon, hath he not called.

1:27 Is thi thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed
it unto thi servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
aft him?  1:28 then king david answer and said, call me bathsheba.
and she came into the king' presence, and stood befor the king.

1:29 and the king sware, and said, As the lord liveth, that hath
redeem my soul out of all distress, 1:30 even as I sware unto thee
bi the lord god of israel, saying, assuredli solomon thi son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so
wil I certainli do thi day.

1:31 then bathsheba bow with her face to the earth, and did
rever to the king, and said, let my lord king david live for ever.

1:32 and king david said, call me zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada. and they came befor the
king.

1:33 the king also said unto them, take with you the servant of your
lord, and caus solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring
him down to gihon: 1:34 and let zadok the priest and nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over israel: and blow ye with the
trumpet, and say, god save king solomon.

1:35 then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my
throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have appoint him to
b ruler over israel and over judah.

1:36 and benaiah the son of jehoiada answer the king, and said,
amen: the lord god of my lord the king say so too.

1:37 As the lord hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with
solomon, and make hi throne greater than the throne of my lord king
david.

1:38 So zadok the priest, and nathan the prophet, and benaiah the son
of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the pelethites, went down, and
caus solomon to ride upon king david' mule, and brought him to
gihon.

1:39 and zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle,
and anoint solomon. and they blew the trumpet; and all the people
said, god save king solomon.

1:40 and all the peopl came up after him, and the peopl pipe with
pipes, and rejoic with great joy, so that the earth rent with the
sound of them.

1:41 and adonijah and all the guest that were with him heard it as
they had made an end of eating. and when joab heard the sound of the
trumpet, he said, wherefor is thi nois of the citi be in an
uproar?  1:42 and while he yet spake, behold, jonathan the son of
abiathar the priest came; and adonijah said unto him, come in; for
thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.

1:43 and jonathan answer and said to adonijah, verili our lord king
david hath made solomon king.

1:44 and the king hath sent with him zadok the priest, and nathan the
prophet, and benaiah the son of jehoiada, and the cherethites, and the
pelethites, and they have caus him to ride upon the king' mule:
1:45 and zadok the priest and nathan the prophet have anoint him
k in gihon: and they are come up from thenc rejoicing, so that the
citi rang again. thi is the nois that ye have heard.

1:46 and also solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.

1:47 and moreov the king' servant came to bless our lord king
david, saying, god make the name of solomon better than thi name, and
mak hi throne greater than thi throne. and the king bow himself
upon the bed.

1:48 and also thu said the king, bless be the lord god of israel,
which hath given one to sit on my throne thi day, mine eye even
se it.

1:49 and all the guest that were with adonijah were afraid, and rose
up, and went everi man hi way.

1:50 and adonijah fear becaus of solomon, and arose, and went, and
caught hold on the horn of the altar.

1:51 and it wa told solomon, saying, behold, adonijah feareth king
solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horn of the altar,
saying, let king solomon swear unto me today that he will not slay his
serv with the sword.

1:52 and solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthi man, there
shal not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wicked shall be
found in him, he shall die.

1:53 So king solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar.
and he came and bow himself to king solomon: and solomon said unto
him, Go to thine house.

2:1 now the day of david drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
solomon hi son, saying, 2:2 I go the way of all the earth: be thou
strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 2:3 and keep the charg of
th lord thi god, to walk in hi ways, to keep hi statutes, and his
commandments, and hi judgments, and hi testimonies, as it is written
in the law of moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest,
and whithersoev thou turnest thyself: 2:4 that the lord may continue
hi word which he spake concern me, saying, If thi children take
he to their way, to walk befor me in truth with all their heart and
with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the
thron of israel.

2:5 moreov thou knowest also what joab the son of zeruiah did to me,
and what he did to the two captain of the host of israel, unto abner
th son of ner, and unto amasa the son of jether, whom he slew, and
sh the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his
girdl that wa about hi loins, and in hi shoe that were on his
feet.

2:6 Do therefor accord to thi wisdom, and let not hi hoar head go
down to the grave in peace.

2:7 but shew kind unto the son of barzillai the gileadite, and
let them be of those that eat at thi table: for so they came to me
when I fled becaus of absalom thi brother.

2:8 and, behold, thou hast with thee shimei the son of gera, a
benjamit of bahurim, which curs me with a grievou curs in the day
when I went to mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at jordan, and i
swar to him by the lord, saying, I will not put thee to death with
th sword.

2:9 now therefor hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and
knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but hi hoar head bring
thou down to the grave with blood.

2:10 So david slept with hi fathers, and wa buri in the citi of
david.

2:11 and the day that david reign over israel were forti years:
seven year reign he in hebron, and thirti and three year reigned
h in jerusalem.

2:12 then sat solomon upon the throne of david hi father; and his
kingdom wa establish greatly.

2:13 and adonijah the son of haggith came to bathsheba the mother of
solomon. and she said, comest thou peaceably? and he said, peaceably.

2:14 He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. and she said,
say on.

2:15 and he said, thou knowest that the kingdom wa mine, and that all
israel set their face on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom
i turn about, and is becom my brother's: for it wa hi from the
lord.

2:16 and now I ask one petit of thee, deni me not. and she said
unto him, say on.

2:17 and he said, speak, I pray thee, unto solomon the king, (for he
wil not say thee nay,) that he give me abishag the shunammit to
wife.

2:18 and bathsheba said, well; I will speak for thee unto the king.

2:19 bathsheba therefor went unto king solomon, to speak unto him for
adonijah. and the king rose up to meet her, and bow himself unto
her, and sat down on hi throne, and caus a seat to be set for the
king' mother; and she sat on hi right hand.

2:20 then she said, I desir one small petit of thee; I pray thee,
say me not nay. and the king said unto her, ask on, my mother: for i
wil not say thee nay.

2:21 and she said, let abishag the shunammit be given to adonijah thy
broth to wife.

2:22 and king solomon answer and said unto hi mother, and whi dost
thou ask abishag the shunammit for adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for abiathar the
priest, and for joab the son of zeruiah.

2:23 then king solomon sware by the lord, saying, god do so to me, and
mor also, if adonijah have not spoken thi word against hi own life.

2:24 now therefore, as the lord liveth, which hath establish me, and
set me on the throne of david my father, and who hath made me an
house, as he promised, adonijah shall be put to death thi day.

2:25 and king solomon sent by the hand of benaiah the son of jehoiada;
and he fell upon him that he died.

2:26 and unto abiathar the priest said the king, get thee to anathoth,
unto thine own fields; for thou art worthi of death: but I will not at
thi time put thee to death, becaus thou barest the ark of the lord
god befor david my father, and becaus thou hast been afflict in
al wherein my father wa afflicted.

2:27 So solomon thrust out abiathar from be priest unto the lord;
that he might fulfil the word of the lord, which he spake concerning
th hous of eli in shiloh.

2:28 then tide came to joab: for joab had turn after adonijah,
though he turn not after absalom. and joab fled unto the tabernacle
of the lord, and caught hold on the horn of the altar.

2:29 and it wa told king solomon that joab wa fled unto the
tabernacl of the lord; and, behold, he is by the altar. then solomon
s benaiah the son of jehoiada, saying, go, fall upon him.

2:30 and benaiah came to the tabernacl of the lord, and said unto
him, thu saith the king, come forth. and he said, nay; but I will die
here. and benaiah brought the king word again, saying, thu said joab,
and thu he answer me.

2:31 and the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and fall upon
him, and buri him; that thou mayest take away the innoc blood,
which joab shed, from me, and from the hous of my father.

2:32 and the lord shall return hi blood upon hi own head, who fell
upon two men more righteou and better than he, and slew them with the
sword, my father david not know thereof, to wit, abner the son of
ner, captain of the host of israel, and amasa the son of jether,
captain of the host of judah.

2:33 their blood shall therefor return upon the head of joab, and
upon the head of hi seed for ever: but upon david, and upon hi seed,
and upon hi house, and upon hi throne, shall there be peac for ever
from the lord.

2:34 So benaiah the son of jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and
slew him: and he wa buri in hi own hous in the wilderness.

2:35 and the king put benaiah the son of jehoiada in hi room over the
host: and zadok the priest did the king put in the room of abiathar.

2:36 and the king sent and call for shimei, and said unto him, build
the an hous in jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence
ani whither.

2:37 for it shall be, that on the day thou goest out, and passest over
th brook kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely
die: thi blood shall be upon thine own head.

2:38 and shimei said unto the king, the say is good: as my lord the
k hath said, so will thi servant do. and shimei dwelt in jerusalem
mani days.

2:39 and it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the
serv of shimei ran away unto achish son of maachah king of gath.
and they told shimei, saying, behold, thi servant be in gath.

2:40 and shimei arose, and saddl hi ass, and went to gath to achish
to seek hi servants: and shimei went, and brought hi servant from
gath.

2:41 and it wa told solomon that shimei had gone from jerusalem to
gath, and wa come again.

2:42 and the king sent and call for shimei, and said unto him, did i
not make thee to swear by the lord, and protest unto thee, saying,
know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any
whither, that thou shalt sure die? and thou saidst unto me, the word
that I have heard is good.

2:43 whi then hast thou not kept the oath of the lord, and the
command that I have charg thee with?  2:44 the king said
moreov to shimei, thou knowest all the wicked which thine heart
i privi to, that thou didst to david my father: therefor the lord
shal return thi wicked upon thine own head; 2:45 and king solomon
shal be blessed, and the throne of david shall be establish before
th lord for ever.

2:46 So the king command benaiah the son of jehoiada; which went
out, and fell upon him, that he died. and the kingdom wa established
in the hand of solomon.

3:1 and solomon made affin with pharaoh king of egypt, and took
pharaoh' daughter, and brought her into the citi of david, until he
had made an end of build hi own house, and the hous of the lord,
and the wall of jerusalem round about.

3:2 onli the peopl sacrif in high places, becaus there wa no
hous built unto the name of the lord, until those days.

3:3 and solomon love the lord, walk in the statut of david his
father: onli he sacrif and burnt incens in high places.

3:4 and the king went to gibeon to sacrific there; for that wa the
great high place: a thousand burnt offer did solomon offer upon
that altar.

3:5 In gibeon the lord appear to solomon in a dream by night: and
god said, ask what I shall give thee.

3:6 and solomon said, thou hast shew unto thi servant david my
fath great mercy, accord as he walk befor thee in truth, and
in righteousness, and in upright of heart with thee; and thou hast
kept for him thi great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to
sit on hi throne, as it is thi day.

3:7 and now, O lord my god, thou hast made thi servant king instead of
david my father: and I am but a littl child: I know not how to go out
or come in.

3:8 and thi servant is in the midst of thi peopl which thou hast
chosen, a great people, that cannot be number nor count for
multitude.

3:9 give therefor thi servant an understand heart to judg thy
people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is abl to
judg thi thi so great a people?  3:10 and the speech pleas the
lord, that solomon had ask thi thing.

3:11 and god said unto him, becaus thou hast ask thi thing, and
hast not ask for thyself long life; neither hast ask rich for
thyself, nor hast ask the life of thine enemies; but hast ask for
thyself understand to discern judgment; 3:12 behold, I have done
accord to thi words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an
understand heart; so that there wa none like thee befor thee,
neith after thee shall ani aris like unto thee.

3:13 and I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both
riches, and honour: so that there shall not be ani among the kings
lik unto thee all thi days.

3:14 and if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statut and my
commandments, as thi father david did walk, then I will lengthen thy
days.

3:15 and solomon awoke; and, behold, it wa a dream. and he came to
jerusalem, and stood befor the ark of the coven of the lord, and
off up burnt offerings, and offer peac offerings, and made a
feast to all hi servants.

3:16 then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and
stood befor him.

3:17 and the one woman said, O my lord, I and thi woman dwell in one
house; and I wa deliv of a child with her in the house.

3:18 and it came to pass the third day after that I wa delivered,
that thi woman wa deliv also: and we were together; there wa no
strang with us in the house, save we two in the house.

3:19 and thi woman' child die in the night; becaus she overlaid
it.

3:20 and she aros at midnight, and took my son from besid me, while
thin handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead
child in my bosom.

3:21 and when I rose in the morn to give my child suck, behold, it
wa dead: but when I had consid it in the morning, behold, it was
not my son, which I did bear.

3:22 and the other woman said, nay; but the live is my son, and the
dead is thi son. and thi said, no; but the dead is thi son, and the
liv is my son. thu they spake befor the king.

3:23 then said the king, the one saith, thi is my son that liveth,
and thi son is the dead: and the other saith, nay; but thi son is the
dead, and my son is the living.

3:24 and the king said, bring me a sword. and they brought a sword
befor the king.

3:25 and the king said, divid the live child in two, and give half
to the one, and half to the other.

3:26 then spake the woman whose the live child wa unto the king,
for her bowel yearn upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her
th live child, and in no wise slay it. but the other said, let it
b neither mine nor thine, but divid it.

3:27 then the king answer and said, give her the live child, and
in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

3:28 and all israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged;
and they fear the king: for they saw that the wisdom of god wa in
him, to do judgment.

4:1 So king solomon wa king over all israel.

4:2 and these were the princ which he had; azariah the son of zadok
th priest, 4:3 elihoreph and ahiah, the son of shisha, scribes;
jehoshaphat the son of ahilud, the recorder.

4:4 and benaiah the son of jehoiada wa over the host: and zadok and
abiathar were the priests: 4:5 and azariah the son of nathan wa over
th officers: and zabud the son of nathan wa princip officer, and
th king' friend: 4:6 and ahishar wa over the household: and
adoniram the son of abda wa over the tribute.

4:7 and solomon had twelv offic over all israel, which provided
victu for the king and hi household: each man hi month in a year
mad provision.

4:8 and these are their names: the son of hur, in mount ephraim: 4:9
the son of dekar, in makaz, and in shaalbim, and bethshemesh, and
elonbethhanan: 4:10 the son of hesed, in aruboth; to him pertained
sochoh, and all the land of hepher: 4:11 the son of abinadab, in all
th region of dor; which had taphath the daughter of solomon to wife:
4:12 baana the son of ahilud; to him pertain taanach and megiddo,
and all bethshean, which is by zartanah beneath jezreel, from
bethshean to abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond jokneam:
4:13 the son of geber, in ramothgilead; to him pertain the town of
jair the son of manasseh, which are in gilead; to him also pertained
th region of argob, which is in bashan, threescor great citi with
wal and brasen bars: 4:14 ahinadab the son of iddo had mahanaim:
4:15 ahimaaz wa in naphtali; he also took basmath the daughter of
solomon to wife: 4:16 baanah the son of hushai wa in asher and in
aloth: 4:17 jehoshaphat the son of paruah, in issachar: 4:18 shimei
th son of elah, in benjamin: 4:19 geber the son of uri wa in the
countri of gilead, in the countri of sihon king of the amorites, and
of Og king of bashan; and he wa the onli offic which wa in the
land.

4:20 judah and israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in
multitude, eat and drinking, and make merry.

4:21 and solomon reign over all kingdom from the river unto the
land of the philistines, and unto the border of egypt: they brought
presents, and serv solomon all the day of hi life.

4:22 and solomon' provis for one day wa thirti measur of fine
flour, and threescor measur of meal, 4:23 ten fat oxen, and twenty
oxen out of the pastures, and an hundr sheep, besid harts, and
roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fat fowl.

4:24 for he had dominion over all the region on thi side the river,
from tiphsah even to azzah, over all the king on thi side the river:
and he had peac on all side round about him.

4:25 and judah and israel dwelt safely, everi man under hi vine and
und hi fig tree, from dan even to beersheba, all the day of
solomon.

4:26 and solomon had forti thousand stall of hors for hi chariots,
and twelv thousand horsemen.

4:27 and those offic provid victual for king solomon, and for all
that came unto king solomon' table, everi man in hi month: they
lack nothing.

4:28 barley also and straw for the hors and dromedari brought they
unto the place where the offic were, everi man accord to his
charge.

4:29 and god gave solomon wisdom and understand exceed much, and
larg of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.

4:30 and solomon' wisdom excel the wisdom of all the children of
th east country, and all the wisdom of egypt.

4:31 for he wa wiser than all men; than ethan the ezrahite, and
heman, and chalcol, and darda, the son of mahol: and hi fame wa in
al nation round about.

4:32 and he spake three thousand proverbs: and hi song were a
thousand and five.

4:33 and he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in lebanon
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of
beasts, and of fowl, and of creep things, and of fishes.

4:34 and there came of all peopl to hear the wisdom of solomon, from
al king of the earth, which had heard of hi wisdom.

5:1 and hiram king of tyre sent hi servant unto solomon; for he had
heard that they had anoint him king in the room of hi father: for
hiram wa ever a lover of david.

5:2 and solomon sent to hiram, saying, 5:3 thou knowest how that david
mi father could not build an hous unto the name of the lord hi god
for the war which were about him on everi side, until the lord put
them under the sole of hi feet.

5:4 but now the lord my god hath given me rest on everi side, so that
ther is neither adversari nor evil occurrent.

5:5 and, behold, I purpos to build an hous unto the name of the lord
mi god, as the lord spake unto david my father, saying, thi son, whom
i will set upon thi throne in thi room, he shall build an hous unto
mi name.

5:6 now therefor command thou that they hew me cedar tree out of
lebanon; and my servant shall be with thi servants: and unto thee
wil I give hire for thi servant accord to all that thou shalt
appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us ani that can
skil to hew timber like unto the sidonians.

5:7 and it came to pass, when hiram heard the word of solomon, that
h rejoic greatly, and said, bless be the lord thi day, which
hath given unto david a wise son over thi great people.

5:8 and hiram sent to solomon, saying, I have consid the things
which thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thi desir concerning
timb of cedar, and concern timber of fir.

5:9 My servant shall bring them down from lebanon unto the sea: and i
wil convey them by sea in float unto the place that thou shalt
appoint me, and will caus them to be discharg there, and thou shalt
rec them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in give food for
mi household.

5:10 So hiram gave solomon cedar tree and fir tree accord to all
hi desire.

5:11 and solomon gave hiram twenti thousand measur of wheat for food
to hi household, and twenti measur of pure oil: thu gave solomon
to hiram year by year.

5:12 and the lord gave solomon wisdom, as he promis him: and there
wa peac between hiram and solomon; and they two made a league
together.

5:13 and king solomon rais a levi out of all israel; and the levy
wa thirti thousand men.

5:14 and he sent them to lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a
month they were in lebanon, and two month at home: and adoniram was
ov the levy.

5:15 and solomon had threescor and ten thousand that bare burdens,
and fourscor thousand hewer in the mountains; 5:16 besid the chief
of solomon' offic which were over the work, three thousand and
thre hundred, which rule over the peopl that wrought in the work.

5:17 and the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly
stones, and hew stones, to lay the foundat of the house.

5:18 and solomon' builder and hiram' builder did hew them, and the
stonesquarers: so they prepar timber and stone to build the house.

6:1 and it came to pass in the four hundr and eightieth year after
th children of israel were come out of the land of egypt, in the
fourth year of solomon' reign over israel, in the month zif, which is
th second month, that he began to build the hous of the lord.

6:2 and the hous which king solomon built for the lord, the length
thereof wa threescor cubits, and the breadth thereof twenti cubits,
and the height thereof thirti cubits.

6:3 and the porch befor the templ of the house, twenti cubit was
th length thereof, accord to the breadth of the house; and ten
cubit wa the breadth thereof befor the house.

6:4 and for the hous he made window of narrow lights.

6:5 and against the wall of the hous he built chamber round about,
against the wall of the hous round about, both of the templ and of
th oracle: and he made chamber round about: 6:6 the nethermost
chamb wa five cubit broad, and the middl wa six cubit broad,
and the third wa seven cubit broad: for without in the wall of the
hous he made narrow rest round about, that the beam should not be
fasten in the wall of the house.

6:7 and the house, when it wa in building, wa built of stone made
readi befor it wa brought thither: so that there wa neither hammer
nor axe nor ani tool of iron heard in the house, while it wa in
building.

6:8 the door for the middl chamber wa in the right side of the
house: and they went up with wind stair into the middl chamber,
and out of the middl into the third.

6:9 So he built the house, and finish it; and cover the hous with
beam and board of cedar.

6:10 and then he built chamber against all the house, five cubits
high: and they rest on the hous with timber of cedar.

6:11 and the word of the lord came to solomon, saying, 6:12 concerning
thi hous which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my
statutes, and execut my judgments, and keep all my command to
walk in them; then will I perform my word with thee, which I spake
unto david thi father: 6:13 and I will dwell among the children of
israel, and will not forsak my peopl israel.

6:14 So solomon built the house, and finish it.

6:15 and he built the wall of the hous within with board of cedar,
both the floor of the house, and the wall of the ceiling: and he
cov them on the insid with wood, and cover the floor of the
hous with plank of fir.

6:16 and he built twenti cubit on the side of the house, both the
floor and the wall with board of cedar: he even built them for it
within, even for the oracle, even for the most holi place.

6:17 and the house, that is, the templ befor it, wa forti cubits
long.

6:18 and the cedar of the hous within wa carv with knop and open
flowers: all wa cedar; there wa no stone seen.

6:19 and the oracl he prepar in the hous within, to set there the
ark of the coven of the lord.

6:20 and the oracl in the forepart wa twenti cubit in length, and
twenti cubit in breadth, and twenti cubit in the height thereof: and
h overlaid it with pure gold; and so cover the altar which wa of
cedar.

6:21 So solomon overlaid the hous within with pure gold: and he made
a partit by the chain of gold befor the oracle; and he overlaid
it with gold.

6:22 and the whole hous he overlaid with gold, until he had finished
al the house: also the whole altar that wa by the oracl he overlaid
with gold.

6:23 and within the oracl he made two cherubim of oliv tree, each
ten cubit high.

6:24 and five cubit wa the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits
th other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing
unto the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.

6:25 and the other cherub wa ten cubits: both the cherubim were of
on measur and one size.

6:26 the height of the one cherub wa ten cubits, and so wa it of the
oth cherub.

6:27 and he set the cherubim within the inner house: and they
stretch forth the wing of the cherubims, so that the wing of the
on touch the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touch the
oth wall; and their wing touch one anoth in the midst of the
house.

6:28 and he overlaid the cherubim with gold.

6:29 and he carv all the wall of the hous round about with carved
figur of cherubim and palm tree and open flowers, within and
without.

6:30 and the floor of the hous he overlaid with gold, within and
without.

6:31 and for the enter of the oracl he made door of oliv tree:
th lintel and side post were a fifth part of the wall.

6:32 the two door also were of oliv tree; and he carv upon them
carv of cherubim and palm tree and open flowers, and overlaid
them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm
trees.

6:33 So also made he for the door of the templ post of oliv tree, a
fourth part of the wall.

6:34 and the two door were of fir tree: the two leav of the one
door were folding, and the two leav of the other door were folding.

6:35 and he carv thereon cherubim and palm tree and open flowers:
and cover them with gold fit upon the carv work.

6:36 and he built the inner court with three row of hew stone, and
a row of cedar beams.

6:37 In the fourth year wa the foundat of the hous of the lord
laid, in the month zif: 6:38 and in the eleventh year, in the month
bul, which is the eighth month, wa the hous finish throughout all
th part thereof, and accord to all the fashion of it. So wa he
seven year in build it.

7:1 but solomon wa build hi own hous thirteen years, and he
finish all hi house.

7:2 He built also the hous of the forest of lebanon; the length
thereof wa an hundr cubits, and the breadth thereof fifti cubits,
and the height thereof thirti cubits, upon four row of cedar pillars,
with cedar beam upon the pillars.

7:3 and it wa cover with cedar abov upon the beams, that lay on
forti five pillars, fifteen in a row.

7:4 and there were window in three rows, and light wa against light
in three ranks.

7:5 and all the door and post were square, with the windows: and
light wa against light in three ranks.

7:6 and he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof wa fifty
cubits, and the breadth thereof thirti cubits: and the porch was
befor them: and the other pillar and the thick beam were before
them.

7:7 then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the
porch of judgment: and it wa cover with cedar from one side of the
floor to the other.

7:8 and hi hous where he dwelt had anoth court within the porch,
which wa of the like work. solomon made also an hous for pharaoh's
daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto thi porch.

7:9 all these were of costli stones, accord to the measur of
hew stones, saw with saws, within and without, even from the
found unto the coping, and so on the outsid toward the great
court.

7:10 and the foundat wa of costli stones, even great stones,
ston of ten cubits, and stone of eight cubits.

7:11 and abov were costli stones, after the measur of hew stones,
and cedars.

7:12 and the great court round about wa with three row of hewed
stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the
hous of the lord, and for the porch of the house.

7:13 and king solomon sent and fetch hiram out of tyre.

7:14 He wa a widow' son of the tribe of naphtali, and hi father was
a man of tyre, a worker in brass: and he wa fill with wisdom, and
understanding, and cun to work all work in brass. and he came to
k solomon, and wrought all hi work.

7:15 for he cast two pillar of brass, of eighteen cubit high apiece:
and a line of twelv cubit did compass either of them about.

7:16 and he made two chapit of molten brass, to set upon the tops
of the pillars: the height of the one chapit wa five cubits, and
th height of the other chapit wa five cubits: 7:17 and net of
check work, and wreath of chain work, for the chapit which were
upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for
th other chapiter.

7:18 and he made the pillars, and two row round about upon the one
network, to cover the chapit that were upon the top, with
pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.

7:19 and the chapit that were upon the top of the pillar were of
lili work in the porch, four cubits.

7:20 and the chapit upon the two pillar had pomegran also
above, over against the belli which wa by the network: and the
pomegran were two hundr in row round about upon the other
chapiter.

7:21 and he set up the pillar in the porch of the temple: and he set
up the right pillar, and call the name thereof jachin: and he set up
th left pillar, and call the name thereof boaz.

7:22 and upon the top of the pillar wa lili work: so wa the work of
th pillar finished.

7:23 and he made a molten sea, ten cubit from the one brim to the
other: it wa round all about, and hi height wa five cubits: and a
lin of thirti cubit did compass it round about.

7:24 and under the brim of it round about there were knop compassing
it, ten in a cubit, compass the sea round about: the knop were
cast in two rows, when it wa cast.

7:25 It stood upon twelv oxen, three look toward the north, and
thre look toward the west, and three look toward the south, and
thre look toward the east: and the sea wa set abov upon them,
and all their hinder part were inward.

7:26 and it wa an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was
wrought like the brim of a cup, with flower of lilies: it contained
two thousand baths.

7:27 and he made ten base of brass; four cubit wa the length of one
base, and four cubit the breadth thereof, and three cubit the height
of it.

7:28 and the work of the base wa on thi manner: they had borders,
and the border were between the ledges: 7:29 and on the border that
wer between the ledg were lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the
ledg there wa a base above: and beneath the lion and oxen were
certain addit made of thin work.

7:30 and everi base had four brasen wheels, and plate of brass: and
th four corner thereof had undersetters: under the laver were
undersett molten, at the side of everi addition.

7:31 and the mouth of it within the chapit and abov wa a cubit:
but the mouth thereof wa round after the work of the base, a cubit
and an half: and also upon the mouth of it were grave with their
borders, foursquare, not round.

7:32 and under the border were four wheels; and the axletre of the
wheel were join to the base: and the height of a wheel wa a cubit
and half a cubit.

7:33 and the work of the wheel wa like the work of a chariot wheel:
their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes,
wer all molten.

7:34 and there were four undersett to the four corner of one base:
and the undersett were of the veri base itself.

7:35 and in the top of the base wa there a round compass of half a
cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledg thereof and the
bord thereof were of the same.

7:36 for on the plate of the ledg thereof, and on the borders
thereof, he grave cherubims, lions, and palm trees, accord to the
proport of everi one, and addit round about.

7:37 after thi manner he made the ten bases: all of them had one
casting, one measure, and one size.

7:38 then made he ten laver of brass: one laver contain forty
baths: and everi laver wa four cubits: and upon everi one of the ten
bas one laver.

7:39 and he put five base on the right side of the house, and five on
th left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of
th hous eastward over against the south.

7:40 and hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. so
hiram made an end of do all the work that he made king solomon for
th hous of the lord: 7:41 the two pillars, and the two bowl of the
chapit that were on the top of the two pillars; and the two
networks, to cover the two bowl of the chapit which were upon the
top of the pillars; 7:42 and four hundr pomegran for the two
networks, even two row of pomegran for one network, to cover the
two bowl of the chapit that were upon the pillars; 7:43 and the
ten bases, and ten laver on the bases; 7:44 and one sea, and twelve
oxen under the sea; 7:45 and the pots, and the shovels, and the
basons: and all these vessels, which hiram made to king solomon for
th hous of the lord, were of bright brass.

7:46 In the plain of jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between succoth and zarthan.

7:47 and solomon left all the vessel unweighed, becaus they were
exceed many: neither wa the weight of the brass found out.

7:48 and solomon made all the vessel that pertain unto the hous of
th lord: the altar of gold, and the tabl of gold, whereupon the
shewbread was, 7:49 and the candlestick of pure gold, five on the
right side, and five on the left, befor the oracle, with the flowers,
and the lamps, and the tong of gold, 7:50 and the bowls, and the
snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censer of pure
gold; and the hing of gold, both for the door of the inner house,
th most holi place, and for the door of the house, to wit, of the
temple.

7:51 So wa end all the work that king solomon made for the hous of
th lord. and solomon brought in the thing which david hi father had
dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put
among the treasur of the hous of the lord.

8:1 then solomon assembl the elder of israel, and all the head of
th tribes, the chief of the father of the children of israel, unto
k solomon in jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the
coven of the lord out of the citi of david, which is zion.

8:2 and all the men of israel assembl themselv unto king solomon
at the feast in the month ethanim, which is the seventh month.

8:3 and all the elder of israel came, and the priest took up the
ark.

8:4 and they brought up the ark of the lord, and the tabernacl of the
congregation, and all the holi vessel that were in the tabernacle,
even those did the priest and the levit bring up.

8:5 and king solomon, and all the congreg of israel, that were
assembl unto him, were with him befor the ark, sacrif sheep
and oxen, that could not be told nor number for multitude.

8:6 and the priest brought in the ark of the coven of the lord
unto hi place, into the oracl of the house, to the most holi place,
even under the wing of the cherubims.

8:7 for the cherubim spread forth their two wing over the place of
th ark, and the cherubim cover the ark and the stave thereof
above.

8:8 and they drew out the staves, that the end of the stave were
seen out in the holi place befor the oracle, and they were not seen
without: and there they are unto thi day.

8:9 there wa noth in the ark save the two tabl of stone, which
mos put there at horeb, when the lord made a coven with the
children of israel, when they came out of the land of egypt.

8:10 and it came to pass, when the priest were come out of the holy
place, that the cloud fill the hous of the lord, 8:11 So that the
priest could not stand to minist becaus of the cloud: for the
glori of the lord had fill the hous of the lord.

8:12 then spake solomon, the lord said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

8:13 I have sure built thee an hous to dwell in, a settl place
for thee to abid in for ever.

8:14 and the king turn hi face about, and bless all the
congreg of israel: (and all the congreg of israel stood;)
8:15 and he said, bless be the lord god of israel, which spake with
hi mouth unto david my father, and hath with hi hand fulfil it,
saying, 8:16 sinc the day that I brought forth my peopl israel out
of egypt, I chose no citi out of all the tribe of israel to build an
house, that my name might be therein; but I chose david to be over my
peopl israel.

8:17 and it wa in the heart of david my father to build an hous for
th name of the lord god of israel.

8:18 and the lord said unto david my father, wherea it wa in thine
heart to build an hous unto my name, thou didst well that it wa in
thin heart.

8:19 nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thi son that
shal come forth out of thi loins, he shall build the hous unto my
name.

8:20 and the lord hath perform hi word that he spake, and I am
risen up in the room of david my father, and sit on the throne of
israel, as the lord promised, and have built an hous for the name of
th lord god of israel.

8:21 and I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant
of the lord, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out
of the land of egypt.

8:22 and solomon stood befor the altar of the lord in the presenc of
al the congreg of israel, and spread forth hi hand toward
heaven: 8:23 and he said, lord god of israel, there is no god like
thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest coven and
merci with thi servant that walk befor thee with all their heart:
8:24 who hast kept with thi servant david my father that thou
promisedst him: thou spakest also with thi mouth, and hast fulfilled
it with thine hand, as it is thi day.

8:25 therefor now, lord god of israel, keep with thi servant david my
fath that thou promisedst him, saying, there shall not fail thee a
man in my sight to sit on the throne of israel; so that thi children
tak heed to their way, that they walk befor me as thou hast walked
befor me.

8:26 and now, O god of israel, let thi word, I pray thee, be verified,
which thou spakest unto thi servant david my father.

8:27 but will god inde dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and
heaven of heaven cannot contain thee; how much less thi hous that i
hav builded?  8:28 yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy
servant, and to hi supplication, O lord my god, to hearken unto the
cri and to the prayer, which thi servant prayeth befor thee to day:
8:29 that thine eye may be open toward thi hous night and day, even
toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that
thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thi servant shall make
toward thi place.

8:30 and hearken thou to the supplic of thi servant, and of thy
peopl israel, when they shall pray toward thi place: and hear thou
in heaven thi dwell place: and when thou hearest, forgive.

8:31 If ani man trespass against hi neighbour, and an oath be laid
upon him to caus him to swear, and the oath come befor thine altar
in thi house: 8:32 then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judg thy
servants, condemn the wicked, to bring hi way upon hi head; and
justifi the righteous, to give him accord to hi righteousness.

8:33 when thi peopl israel be smitten down befor the enemy, because
they have sin against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and
confess thi name, and pray, and make supplic unto thee in this
house: 8:34 then hear thou in heaven, and forgiv the sin of thy
peopl israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest
unto their fathers.

8:35 when heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, becaus they have
sin against thee; if they pray toward thi place, and confess thy
name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them: 8:36 then
hear thou in heaven, and forgiv the sin of thi servants, and of thy
peopl israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should
walk, and give rain upon thi land, which thou hast given to thi people
for an inheritance.

8:37 If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting,
mildew, locust, or if there be caterpiller; if their enemi besiege
them in the land of their cities; whatsoev plague, whatsoever
sick there be; 8:38 what prayer and supplic soever be made by
ani man, or by all thi peopl israel, which shall know everi man the
plagu of hi own heart, and spread forth hi hand toward thi house:
8:39 then hear thou in heaven thi dwell place, and forgive, and do,
and give to everi man accord to hi ways, whose heart thou knowest;
(for thou, even thou only, knowest the heart of all the children of
men;) 8:40 that they may fear thee all the day that they live in the
land which thou gavest unto our fathers.

8:41 moreov concern a stranger, that is not of thi peopl israel,
but cometh out of a far countri for thi name' sake; 8:42 (for they
shal hear of thi great name, and of thi strong hand, and of thy
stretch out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward thi house;
8:43 hear thou in heaven thi dwell place, and do accord to all
that the stranger calleth to thee for: that all peopl of the earth
may know thi name, to fear thee, as do thi peopl israel; and that
they may know that thi house, which I have builded, is call by thy
name.

8:44 If thi peopl go out to battl against their enemy, whithersoever
th shalt send them, and shall pray unto the lord toward the city
which thou hast chosen, and toward the hous that I have built for thy
name: 8:45 then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their
supplication, and maintain their cause.

8:46 If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sinneth not,)
and thou be angri with them, and deliv them to the enemy, so that
they carri them away captiv unto the land of the enemy, far or near;
8:47 yet if they shall bethink themselv in the land whither they
wer carri captives, and repent, and make supplic unto thee in
th land of them that carri them captives, saying, We have sinned,
and have done perversely, we have commit wickedness; 8:48 and so
return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the
land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thee
toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city
which thou hast chosen, and the hous which I have built for thi name:
8:49 then hear thou their prayer and their supplic in heaven thy
dwel place, and maintain their cause, 8:50 and forgiv thi people
that have sin against thee, and all their transgress wherein
they have transgress against thee, and give them compass before
them who carri them captive, that they may have compass on them:
8:51 for they be thi people, and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest forth out of egypt, from the midst of the furnac of iron:
8:52 that thine eye may be open unto the supplic of thi servant,
and unto the supplic of thi peopl israel, to hearken unto them
in all that they call for unto thee.

8:53 for thou didst separ them from among all the peopl of the
earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of moses
thi servant, when thou broughtest our father out of egypt, O lord
god.

8:54 and it wa so, that when solomon had made an end of pray all
thi prayer and supplic unto the lord, he aros from befor the
altar of the lord, from kneel on hi knee with hi hand spread up
to heaven.

8:55 and he stood, and bless all the congreg of israel with a
loud voice, saying, 8:56 bless be the lord, that hath given rest
unto hi peopl israel, accord to all that he promised: there hath
not fail one word of all hi good promise, which he promis by the
hand of mose hi servant.

8:57 the lord our god be with us, as he wa with our fathers: let him
not leav us, nor forsak us: 8:58 that he may inclin our heart unto
him, to walk in all hi ways, and to keep hi commandments, and his
statutes, and hi judgments, which he command our fathers.

8:59 and let these my words, wherewith I have made supplic before
th lord, be nigh unto the lord our god day and night, that he
maintain the caus of hi servant, and the caus of hi peopl israel
at all times, as the matter shall require: 8:60 that all the peopl of
th earth may know that the lord is god, and that there is none else.

8:61 let your heart therefor be perfect with the lord our god, to
walk in hi statutes, and to keep hi commandments, as at thi day.

8:62 and the king, and all israel with him, offer sacrific before
th lord.

8:63 and solomon offer a sacrific of peac offerings, which he
off unto the lord, two and twenti thousand oxen, and an hundred
and twenti thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of israel
ded the hous of the lord.

8:64 the same day did the king hallow the middl of the court that was
befor the hous of the lord: for there he offer burnt offerings,
and meat offerings, and the fat of the peac offerings: becaus the
brasen altar that wa befor the lord wa too littl to receiv the
burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace
offerings.

8:65 and at that time solomon held a feast, and all israel with him, a
great congregation, from the enter in of hamath unto the river of
egypt, befor the lord our god, seven day and seven days, even
fourteen days.

8:66 On the eighth day he sent the peopl away: and they bless the
king, and went unto their tent joy and glad of heart for all the
good that the lord had done for david hi servant, and for israel
hi people.

9:1 and it came to pass, when solomon had finish the build of the
hous of the lord, and the king' house, and all solomon' desire
which he wa pleas to do, 9:2 that the lord appear to solomon the
second time, as he had appear unto him at gibeon.

9:3 and the lord said unto him, I have heard thi prayer and thy
supplication, that thou hast made befor me: I have hallow this
house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine
ey and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

9:4 and if thou wilt walk befor me, as david thi father walked, in
integr of heart, and in uprightness, to do accord to all that i
hav command thee, and wilt keep my statut and my judgments: 9:5
then I will establish the throne of thi kingdom upon israel for ever,
a I promis to david thi father, saying, there shall not fail thee a
man upon the throne of israel.

9:6 but if ye shall at all turn from follow me, ye or your
children, and will not keep my command and my statut which i
hav set befor you, but go and serv other gods, and worship them:
9:7 then will I cut off israel out of the land which I have given
them; and thi house, which I have hallow for my name, will I cast
out of my sight; and israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all
people: 9:8 and at thi house, which is high, everi one that passeth
bi it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, why
hath the lord done thu unto thi land, and to thi house?  9:9 and
they shall answer, becaus they forsook the lord their god, who
brought forth their father out of the land of egypt, and have taken
hold upon other gods, and have worship them, and serv them:
therefor hath the lord brought upon them all thi evil.

9:10 and it came to pass at the end of twenti years, when solomon had
built the two houses, the hous of the lord, and the king' house,
9:11 (now hiram the king of tyre had furnish solomon with cedar
tre and fir trees, and with gold, accord to all hi desire,) that
then king solomon gave hiram twenti citi in the land of galilee.

9:12 and hiram came out from tyre to see the citi which solomon had
given him; and they pleas him not.

9:13 and he said, what citi are these which thou hast given me, my
brother? and he call them the land of cabul unto thi day.

9:14 and hiram sent to the king sixscor talent of gold.

9:15 and thi is the reason of the levi which king solomon raised; for
to build the hous of the lord, and hi own house, and millo, and the
wal of jerusalem, and hazor, and megiddo, and gezer.

9:16 for pharaoh king of egypt had gone up, and taken gezer, and burnt
it with fire, and slain the canaanit that dwelt in the city, and
given it for a present unto hi daughter, solomon' wife.

9:17 and solomon built gezer, and bethhoron the nether, 9:18 and
baalath, and tadmor in the wilderness, in the land, 9:19 and all the
citi of store that solomon had, and citi for hi chariots, and
citi for hi horsemen, and that which solomon desir to build in
jerusalem, and in lebanon, and in all the land of hi dominion.

9:20 and all the peopl that were left of the amorites, hittites,
perizzites, hivites, and jebusites, which were not of the children of
israel, 9:21 their children that were left after them in the land,
whom the children of israel also were not abl utterli to destroy,
upon those did solomon levi a tribut of bondservic unto thi day.

9:22 but of the children of israel did solomon make no bondmen: but
they were men of war, and hi servants, and hi princes, and his
captains, and ruler of hi chariots, and hi horsemen.

9:23 these were the chief of the offic that were over solomon's
work, five hundr and fifty, which bare rule over the peopl that
wrought in the work.

9:24 but pharaoh' daughter came up out of the citi of david unto her
hous which solomon had built for her: then did he build millo.

9:25 and three time in a year did solomon offer burnt offer and
peac offer upon the altar which he built unto the lord, and he
burnt incens upon the altar that wa befor the lord. So he finished
th house.

9:26 and king solomon made a navi of ship in eziongeber, which is
besid eloth, on the shore of the red sea, in the land of edom.

9:27 and hiram sent in the navi hi servants, shipmen that had
knowledg of the sea, with the servant of solomon.

9:28 and they came to ophir, and fetch from thenc gold, four
hundr and twenti talents, and brought it to king solomon.

10:1 and when the queen of sheba heard of the fame of solomon
concern the name of the lord, she came to prove him with hard
questions.

10:2 and she came to jerusalem with a veri great train, with camels
that bare spices, and veri much gold, and preciou stones: and when
sh wa come to solomon, she commun with him of all that wa in her
heart.

10:3 and solomon told her all her questions: there wa not ani thing
hid from the king, which he told her not.

10:4 and when the queen of sheba had seen all solomon' wisdom, and
th hous that he had built, 10:5 and the meat of hi table, and the
sit of hi servants, and the attend of hi ministers, and
their apparel, and hi cupbearers, and hi ascent by which he went up
unto the hous of the lord; there wa no more spirit in her.

10:6 and she said to the king, It wa a true report that I heard in
min own land of thi act and of thi wisdom.

10:7 howbeit I believ not the words, until I came, and mine eye had
seen it: and, behold, the half wa not told me: thi wisdom and
prosper exceedeth the fame which I heard.

10:8 happi are thi men, happi are these thi servants, which stand
continu befor thee, and that hear thi wisdom.

10:9 bless be the lord thi god, which delight in thee, to set thee
on the throne of israel: becaus the lord love israel for ever,
therefor made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.

10:10 and she gave the king an hundr and twenti talent of gold, and
of spice veri great store, and preciou stones: there came no more
such abund of spice as these which the queen of sheba gave to
k solomon.

10:11 and the navi also of hiram, that brought gold from ophir,
brought in from ophir great plenti of almug trees, and precious
stones.

10:12 and the king made of the almug tree pillar for the hous of
th lord, and for the king' house, harp also and psalteri for
singers: there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto thi day.

10:13 and king solomon gave unto the queen of sheba all her desire,
whatsoev she asked, besid that which solomon gave her of hi royal
bounty.

so she turn and went to her own country, she and her servants.

10:14 now the weight of gold that came to solomon in one year wa six
hundr threescor and six talent of gold, 10:15 besid that he had
of the merchantmen, and of the traffick of the spice merchants, and of
al the king of arabia, and of the governor of the country.

10:16 and king solomon made two hundr target of beaten gold: six
hundr shekel of gold went to one target.

10:17 and he made three hundr shield of beaten gold; three pound of
gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the hous of the
forest of lebanon.

10:18 moreov the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with the best gold.

10:19 the throne had six steps, and the top of the throne wa round
behind: and there were stay on either side on the place of the seat,
and two lion stood besid the stays.

10:20 and twelv lion stood there on the one side and on the other
upon the six steps: there wa not the like made in ani kingdom.

10:21 and all king solomon' drink vessel were of gold, and all
th vessel of the hous of the forest of lebanon were of pure gold;
non were of silver: it wa noth account of in the day of
solomon.

10:22 for the king had at sea a navi of tharshish with the navi of
hiram: onc in three year came the navi of tharshish, bring gold,
and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

10:23 So king solomon exceed all the king of the earth for riches
and for wisdom.

10:24 and all the earth sought to solomon, to hear hi wisdom, which
god had put in hi heart.

10:25 and they brought everi man hi present, vessel of silver, and
vessel of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and
mules, a rate year by year.

10:26 and solomon gather togeth chariot and horsemen: and he had
a thousand and four hundr chariots, and twelv thousand horsemen,
whom he bestow in the citi for chariots, and with the king at
jerusalem.

10:27 and the king made silver to be in jerusalem as stones, and
cedar made he to be as the sycomor tree that are in the vale, for
abundance.

10:28 and solomon had hors brought out of egypt, and linen yarn: the
king' merchant receiv the linen yarn at a price.

10:29 and a chariot came up and went out of egypt for six hundred
shekel of silver, and an hors for an hundr and fifty: and so for
al the king of the hittites, and for the king of syria, did they
br them out by their means.

11:1 but king solomon love mani strang women, togeth with the
daught of pharaoh, women of the moabites, ammonites, edomites,
zidonians, and hittites: 11:2 Of the nation concern which the lord
said unto the children of israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither
shal they come in unto you: for sure they will turn away your heart
aft their gods: solomon clave unto these in love.

11:3 and he had seven hundr wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines: and hi wive turn away hi heart.

11:4 for it came to pass, when solomon wa old, that hi wive turned
away hi heart after other gods: and hi heart wa not perfect with
th lord hi god, as wa the heart of david hi father.

11:5 for solomon went after ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians,
and after milcom the abomin of the ammonites.

11:6 and solomon did evil in the sight of the lord, and went not fully
aft the lord, as did david hi father.

11:7 then did solomon build an high place for chemosh, the abomination
of moab, in the hill that is befor jerusalem, and for molech, the
abomin of the children of ammon.

11:8 and likewis did he for all hi strang wives, which burnt
incens and sacrif unto their gods.

11:9 and the lord wa angri with solomon, becaus hi heart wa turned
from the lord god of israel, which had appear unto him twice, 11:10
and had command him concern thi thing, that he should not go
aft other gods: but he kept not that which the lord commanded.

11:11 wherefor the lord said unto solomon, forasmuch as thi is done
of thee, and thou hast not kept my coven and my statutes, which i
hav command thee, I will sure rend the kingdom from thee, and
wil give it to thi servant.

11:12 notwithstand in thi day I will not do it for david thy
father' sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thi son.

11:13 howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
trib to thi son for david my servant' sake, and for jerusalem' sake
which I have chosen.

11:14 and the lord stir up an adversari unto solomon, hadad the
edomite: he wa of the king' seed in edom.

11:15 for it came to pass, when david wa in edom, and joab the
captain of the host wa gone up to buri the slain, after he had
smitten everi male in edom; 11:16 (for six month did joab remain
ther with all israel, until he had cut off everi male in edom:) 11:17
that hadad fled, he and certain edomit of hi father' servant with
him, to go into egypt; hadad be yet a littl child.

11:18 and they aros out of midian, and came to paran: and they took
men with them out of paran, and they came to egypt, unto pharaoh king
of egypt; which gave him an house, and appoint him victuals, and
gav him land.

11:19 and hadad found great favour in the sight of pharaoh, so that he
gav him to wife the sister of hi own wife, the sister of tahpenes
th queen.

11:20 and the sister of tahpen bare him genubath hi son, whom
tahpen wean in pharaoh' house: and genubath wa in pharaoh's
household among the son of pharaoh.

11:21 and when hadad heard in egypt that david slept with hi fathers,
and that joab the captain of the host wa dead, hadad said to pharaoh,
let me depart, that I may go to mine own country.

11:22 then pharaoh said unto him, but what hast thou lack with me,
that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? and he
answered, nothing: howbeit let me go in ani wise.

11:23 and god stir him up anoth adversary, rezon the son of
eliadah, which fled from hi lord hadadez king of zobah: 11:24 and
h gather men unto him, and becam captain over a band, when david
slew them of zobah: and they went to damascus, and dwelt therein, and
reign in damascus.

11:25 and he wa an adversari to israel all the day of solomon,
besid the mischief that hadad did: and he abhor israel, and
reign over syria.

11:26 and jeroboam the son of nebat, an ephrathit of zereda,
solomon' servant, whose mother' name wa zeruah, a widow woman, even
h lift up hi hand against the king.

11:27 and thi wa the caus that he lift up hi hand against the
king: solomon built millo, and repair the breach of the citi of
david hi father.

11:28 and the man jeroboam wa a mighti man of valour: and solomon
se the young man that he wa industrious, he made him ruler over
al the charg of the hous of joseph.

11:29 and it came to pass at that time when jeroboam went out of
jerusalem, that the prophet ahijah the shilonit found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alon in
th field: 11:30 and ahijah caught the new garment that wa on him,
and rent it in twelv pieces: 11:31 and he said to jeroboam, take thee
ten pieces: for thu saith the lord, the god of israel, behold, I will
rend the kingdom out of the hand of solomon, and will give ten tribes
to thee: 11:32 (but he shall have one tribe for my servant david's
sake, and for jerusalem' sake, the citi which I have chosen out of
al the tribe of israel:) 11:33 becaus that they have forsaken me,
and have worship ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians, chemosh
th god of the moabites, and milcom the god of the children of ammon,
and have not walk in my ways, to do that which is right in mine
eyes, and to keep my statut and my judgments, as did david his
father.

11:34 howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of hi hand: but i
wil make him princ all the day of hi life for david my servant's
sake, whom I chose, becaus he kept my command and my statutes:
11:35 but I will take the kingdom out of hi son' hand, and will give
it unto thee, even ten tribes.

11:36 and unto hi son will I give one tribe, that david my servant
may have a light alway befor me in jerusalem, the citi which I have
chosen me to put my name there.

11:37 and I will take thee, and thou shalt reign accord to all that
thi soul desireth, and shalt be king over israel.

11:38 and it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command
thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to
keep my statut and my commandments, as david my servant did; that i
wil be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for david,
and will give israel unto thee.

11:39 and I will for thi afflict the seed of david, but not for ever.

11:40 solomon sought therefor to kill jeroboam. and jeroboam arose,
and fled into egypt, unto shishak king of egypt, and wa in egypt
until the death of solomon.

11:41 and the rest of the act of solomon, and all that he did, and
hi wisdom, are they not written in the book of the act of solomon?
11:42 and the time that solomon reign in jerusalem over all israel
wa forti years.

11:43 and solomon slept with hi fathers, and wa buri in the city
of david hi father: and rehoboam hi son reign in hi stead.

12:1 and rehoboam went to shechem: for all israel were come to shechem
to make him king.

12:2 and it came to pass, when jeroboam the son of nebat, who wa yet
in egypt, heard of it, (for he wa fled from the presenc of king
solomon, and jeroboam dwelt in egypt;) 12:3 that they sent and called
him. and jeroboam and all the congreg of israel came, and spake
unto rehoboam, saying, 12:4 thi father made our yoke grievous: now
therefor make thou the grievou servic of thi father, and hi heavy
yok which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serv thee.

12:5 and he said unto them, depart yet for three days, then come again
to me. and the peopl departed.

12:6 and king rehoboam consult with the old men, that stood before
solomon hi father while he yet lived, and said, how do ye advis that
i may answer thi people?  12:7 and they spake unto him, saying, if
thou wilt be a servant unto thi peopl thi day, and wilt serv them,
and answer them, and speak good word to them, then they will be thy
serv for ever.

12:8 but he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given
him, and consult with the young men that were grown up with him, and
which stood befor him: 12:9 and he said unto them, what counsel give
y that we may answer thi people, who have spoken to me, saying, make
th yoke which thi father did put upon us lighter?  12:10 and the
young men that were grown up with him spake unto him, saying, thus
shalt thou speak unto thi peopl that spake unto thee, saying, thy
fath made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus
shalt thou say unto them, My littl finger shall be thicker than my
father' loins.

12:11 and now wherea my father did lade you with a heavi yoke, I will
add to your yoke: my father hath chastis you with whips, but I will
chastis you with scorpions.

12:12 So jeroboam and all the peopl came to rehoboam the third day,
a the king had appointed, saying, come to me again the third day.

12:13 and the king answer the peopl roughly, and forsook the old
men' counsel that they gave him; 12:14 and spake to them after the
counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and
i will add to your yoke: my father also chastis you with whips, but
i will chastis you with scorpions.

12:15 wherefor the king hearken not unto the people; for the cause
wa from the lord, that he might perform hi saying, which the lord
spak by ahijah the shilonit unto jeroboam the son of nebat.

12:16 So when all israel saw that the king hearken not unto them,
th peopl answer the king, saying, what portion have we in david?
neith have we inherit in the son of jesse: to your tents, o
israel: now see to thine own house, david. So israel depart unto
their tents.

12:17 but as for the children of israel which dwelt in the citi of
judah, rehoboam reign over them.

12:18 then king rehoboam sent adoram, who wa over the tribute; and
al israel stone him with stones, that he died. therefor king
rehoboam made speed to get him up to hi chariot, to flee to
jerusalem.

12:19 So israel rebel against the hous of david unto thi day.

12:20 and it came to pass, when all israel heard that jeroboam was
com again, that they sent and call him unto the congregation, and
mad him king over all israel: there wa none that follow the house
of david, but the tribe of judah only.

12:21 and when rehoboam wa come to jerusalem, he assembl all the
hous of judah, with the tribe of benjamin, an hundr and fourscore
thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house
of israel, to bring the kingdom again to rehoboam the son of solomon.

12:22 but the word of god came unto shemaiah the man of god, saying,
12:23 speak unto rehoboam, the son of solomon, king of judah, and unto
al the hous of judah and benjamin, and to the remnant of the people,
saying, 12:24 thu saith the lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren the children of israel: return everi man to his
house; for thi thing is from me. they hearken therefor to the word
of the lord, and return to depart, accord to the word of the
lord.

12:25 then jeroboam built shechem in mount ephraim, and dwelt therein;
and went out from thence, and built penuel.

12:26 and jeroboam said in hi heart, now shall the kingdom return to
th hous of david: 12:27 If thi peopl go up to do sacrific in the
hous of the lord at jerusalem, then shall the heart of thi people
turn again unto their lord, even unto rehoboam king of judah, and they
shal kill me, and go again to rehoboam king of judah.

12:28 whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calv of gold,
and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to jerusalem:
behold thi gods, O israel, which brought thee up out of the land of
egypt.

12:29 and he set the one in bethel, and the other put he in dan.

12:30 and thi thing becam a sin: for the peopl went to worship
befor the one, even unto dan.

12:31 and he made an hous of high places, and made priest of the
lowest of the people, which were not of the son of levi.

12:32 and jeroboam ordain a feast in the eighth month, on the
fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in judah, and
h offer upon the altar. So did he in bethel, sacrif unto the
calv that he had made: and he place in bethel the priest of the
high place which he had made.

12:33 So he offer upon the altar which he had made in bethel the
fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had
devis of hi own heart; and ordain a feast unto the children of
israel: and he offer upon the altar, and burnt incense.

13:1 and, behold, there came a man of god out of judah by the word of
th lord unto bethel: and jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.

13:2 and he cri against the altar in the word of the lord, and said,
o altar, altar, thu saith the lord; behold, a child shall be born
unto the hous of david, josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer
th priest of the high place that burn incens upon thee, and men's
bon shall be burnt upon thee.

13:3 and he gave a sign the same day, saying, thi is the sign which
th lord hath spoken; behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes
that are upon it shall be pour out.

13:4 and it came to pass, when king jeroboam heard the say of the
man of god, which had cri against the altar in bethel, that he put
forth hi hand from the altar, saying, lay hold on him. and hi hand,
which he put forth against him, dri up, so that he could not pull it
in again to him.

13:5 the altar also wa rent, and the ash pour out from the altar,
accord to the sign which the man of god had given by the word of
th lord.

13:6 and the king answer and said unto the man of god, intreat now
th face of the lord thi god, and pray for me, that my hand may be
restor me again. and the man of god besought the lord, and the
king' hand wa restor him again, and becam as it wa before.

13:7 and the king said unto the man of god, come home with me, and
refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.

13:8 and the man of god said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half
thin house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor
drink water in thi place: 13:9 for so wa it charg me by the word
of the lord, saying, eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by
th same way that thou camest.

13:10 So he went anoth way, and return not by the way that he came
to bethel.

13:11 now there dwelt an old prophet in bethel; and hi son came and
told him all the work that the man of god had done that day in
bethel: the word which he had spoken unto the king, them they told
also to their father.

13:12 and their father said unto them, what way went he? for hi sons
had seen what way the man of god went, which came from judah.

13:13 and he said unto hi sons, saddl me the ass. So they saddled
him the ass: and he rode thereon, 13:14 and went after the man of god,
and found him sit under an oak: and he said unto him, art thou the
man of god that camest from judah? and he said, I am.

13:15 then he said unto him, come home with me, and eat bread.

13:16 and he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee:
neith will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in thi place:
13:17 for it wa said to me by the word of the lord, thou shalt eat no
bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou
camest.

13:18 He said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel
spak unto me by the word of the lord, saying, bring him back with
the into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. but he
li unto him.

13:19 So he went back with him, and did eat bread in hi house, and
drank water.

13:20 and it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of
th lord came unto the prophet that brought him back: 13:21 and he
cri unto the man of god that came from judah, saying, thu saith the
lord, forasmuch as thou hast disobey the mouth of the lord, and hast
not kept the command which the lord thi god command thee, 13:22
but camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of
th which the lord did say to thee, eat no bread, and drink no water;
thi carcas shall not come unto the sepulchr of thi fathers.

13:23 and it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had
drunk, that he saddl for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom
h had brought back.

13:24 and when he wa gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him:
and hi carcas wa cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion
also stood by the carcase.

13:25 and, behold, men pass by, and saw the carcas cast in the way,
and the lion stand by the carcase: and they came and told it in the
citi where the old prophet dwelt.

13:26 and when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard
thereof, he said, It is the man of god, who wa disobedi unto the
word of the lord: therefor the lord hath deliv him unto the lion,
which hath torn him, and slain him, accord to the word of the lord,
which he spake unto him.

13:27 and he spake to hi sons, saying, saddl me the ass. and they
saddl him.

13:28 and he went and found hi carcas cast in the way, and the ass
and the lion stand by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the
carcase, nor torn the ass.

13:29 and the prophet took up the carcas of the man of god, and laid
it upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the
city, to mourn and to buri him.

13:30 and he laid hi carcas in hi own grave; and they mourn over
him, saying, alas, my brother!  13:31 and it came to pass, after he
had buri him, that he spake to hi sons, saying, when I am dead,
then buri me in the sepulchr wherein the man of god is buried; lay my
bon besid hi bones: 13:32 for the say which he cri by the
word of the lord against the altar in bethel, and against all the
hous of the high place which are in the citi of samaria, shall
sur come to pass.

13:33 after thi thing jeroboam return not from hi evil way, but
mad again of the lowest of the peopl priest of the high places:
whosoev would, he consecr him, and he becam one of the priests
of the high places.

13:34 and thi thing becam sin unto the hous of jeroboam, even to
cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.

14:1 At that time abijah the son of jeroboam fell sick.

14:2 and jeroboam said to hi wife, arise, I pray thee, and disguise
thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of jeroboam; and get
the to shiloh: behold, there is ahijah the prophet, which told me
that I should be king over thi people.

14:3 and take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of
honey, and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall becom of the
child.

14:4 and jeroboam' wife did so, and arose, and went to shiloh, and
cam to the hous of ahijah. but ahijah could not see; for hi eyes
wer set by reason of hi age.

14:5 and the lord said unto ahijah, behold, the wife of jeroboam
cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son; for he is sick: thu and
thu shalt thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in,
that she shall feign herself to be anoth woman.

14:6 and it wa so, when ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she
cam in at the door, that he said, come in, thou wife of jeroboam; why
feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thee with heavy
tidings.

14:7 go, tell jeroboam, thu saith the lord god of israel, forasmuch
a I exalt thee from among the people, and made thee princ over my
peopl israel, 14:8 and rent the kingdom away from the hous of david,
and gave it thee: and yet thou hast not been as my servant david, who
kept my commandments, and who follow me with all hi heart, to do
that onli which wa right in mine eyes; 14:9 but hast done evil above
al that were befor thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other
gods, and molten images, to provok me to anger, and hast cast me
behind thi back: 14:10 therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the
hous of jeroboam, and will cut off from jeroboam him that pisseth
against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in israel, and will
tak away the remnant of the hous of jeroboam, as a man taketh away
dung, till it be all gone.

14:11 him that dieth of jeroboam in the citi shall the dog eat; and
him that dieth in the field shall the fowl of the air eat: for the
lord hath spoken it.

14:12 aris thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: and when thy
feet enter into the city, the child shall die.

14:13 and all israel shall mourn for him, and buri him: for he onli of
jeroboam shall come to the grave, becaus in him there is found some
good thing toward the lord god of israel in the hous of jeroboam.

14:14 moreov the lord shall rais him up a king over israel, who
shal cut off the hous of jeroboam that day: but what? even now.

14:15 for the lord shall smite israel, as a reed is shaken in the
water, and he shall root up israel out of thi good land, which he
gav to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river,
becaus they have made their groves, provok the lord to anger.

14:16 and he shall give israel up becaus of the sin of jeroboam, who
did sin, and who made israel to sin.

14:17 and jeroboam' wife arose, and departed, and came to tirzah: and
when she came to the threshold of the door, the child died; 14:18 and
they buri him; and all israel mourn for him, accord to the word
of the lord, which he spake by the hand of hi servant ahijah the
prophet.

14:19 and the rest of the act of jeroboam, how he warred, and how he
reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicl of the
k of israel.

14:20 and the day which jeroboam reign were two and twenti years:
and he slept with hi fathers, and nadab hi son reign in hi stead.

14:21 and rehoboam the son of solomon reign in judah. rehoboam was
forti and one year old when he began to reign, and he reigned
seventeen year in jerusalem, the citi which the lord did choos out
of all the tribe of israel, to put hi name there. and hi mother's
nam wa naamah an ammonitess.

14:22 and judah did evil in the sight of the lord, and they provoked
him to jealousi with their sin which they had committed, abov all
that their father had done.

14:23 for they also built them high places, and images, and groves, on
everi high hill, and under everi green tree.

14:24 and there were also sodomit in the land: and they did
accord to all the abomin of the nation which the lord cast
out befor the children of israel.

14:25 and it came to pass in the fifth year of king rehoboam, that
shishak king of egypt came up against jerusalem: 14:26 and he took
away the treasur of the hous of the lord, and the treasur of the
king' house; he even took away all: and he took away all the shields
of gold which solomon had made.

14:27 and king rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and
commit them unto the hand of the chief of the guard, which kept
th door of the king' house.

14:28 and it wa so, when the king went into the hous of the lord,
that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard
chamber.

14:29 now the rest of the act of rehoboam, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?
14:30 and there wa war between rehoboam and jeroboam all their days.

14:31 and rehoboam slept with hi fathers, and wa buri with his
fath in the citi of david. and hi mother' name wa naamah an
ammonitess. and abijam hi son reign in hi stead.

15:1 now in the eighteenth year of king jeroboam the son of nebat
reign abijam over judah.

15:2 three year reign he in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
maachah, the daughter of abishalom.

15:3 and he walk in all the sin of hi father, which he had done
befor him: and hi heart wa not perfect with the lord hi god, as
th heart of david hi father.

15:4 nevertheless for david' sake did the lord hi god give him a
lamp in jerusalem, to set up hi son after him, and to establish
jerusalem: 15:5 becaus david did that which wa right in the eye of
th lord, and turn not asid from ani thing that he command him
al the day of hi life, save onli in the matter of uriah the
hittite.

15:6 and there wa war between rehoboam and jeroboam all the day of
hi life.

15:7 now the rest of the act of abijam, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah? and
ther wa war between abijam and jeroboam.

15:8 and abijam slept with hi fathers; and they buri him in the
citi of david: and asa hi son reign in hi stead.

15:9 and in the twentieth year of jeroboam king of israel reign asa
ov judah.

15:10 and forti and one year reign he in jerusalem. and his
mother' name wa maachah, the daughter of abishalom.

15:11 and asa did that which wa right in the eye of the lord, as did
david hi father.

15:12 and he took away the sodomit out of the land, and remov all
th idol that hi father had made.

15:13 and also maachah hi mother, even her he remov from being
queen, becaus she had made an idol in a grove; and asa destroy her
idol, and burnt it by the brook kidron.

15:14 but the high place were not removed: nevertheless asa' heart
wa perfect with the lord all hi days.

15:15 and he brought in the thing which hi father had dedicated, and
th thing which himself had dedicated, into the hous of the lord,
silver, and gold, and vessels.

15:16 and there wa war between asa and baasha king of israel all
their days.

15:17 and baasha king of israel went up against judah, and built
ramah, that he might not suffer ani to go out or come in to asa king
of judah.

15:18 then asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the
treasur of the hous of the lord, and the treasur of the king's
house, and deliv them into the hand of hi servants: and king asa
s them to benhadad, the son of tabrimon, the son of hezion, king of
syria, that dwelt at damascus, saying, 15:19 there is a leagu between
m and thee, and between my father and thi father: behold, I have sent
unto thee a present of silver and gold; come and break thi leagu with
baasha king of israel, that he may depart from me.

15:20 So benhadad hearken unto king asa, and sent the captain of
th host which he had against the citi of israel, and smote ijon,
and dan, and abelbethmaachah, and all cinneroth, with all the land of
naphtali.

15:21 and it came to pass, when baasha heard thereof, that he left off
build of ramah, and dwelt in tirzah.

15:22 then king asa made a proclam throughout all judah; none was
exempted: and they took away the stone of ramah, and the timber
thereof, wherewith baasha had builded; and king asa built with them
geba of benjamin, and mizpah.

15:23 the rest of all the act of asa, and all hi might, and all that
h did, and the citi which he built, are they not written in the
book of the chronicl of the king of judah? nevertheless in the time
of hi old age he wa diseas in hi feet.

15:24 and asa slept with hi fathers, and wa buri with hi fathers
in the citi of david hi father: and jehoshaphat hi son reign in
hi stead.

15:25 and nadab the son of jeroboam began to reign over israel in the
second year of asa king of judah, and reign over israel two years.

15:26 and he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walk in the way
of hi father, and in hi sin wherewith he made israel to sin.

15:27 and baasha the son of ahijah, of the hous of issachar,
conspir against him; and baasha smote him at gibbethon, which
belong to the philistines; for nadab and all israel laid sieg to
gibbethon.

15:28 even in the third year of asa king of judah did baasha slay him,
and reign in hi stead.

15:29 and it came to pass, when he reigned, that he smote all the
hous of jeroboam; he left not to jeroboam ani that breathed, until he
had destroy him, accord unto the say of the lord, which he
spak by hi servant ahijah the shilonite: 15:30 becaus of the sins
of jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made israel sin, by his
provoc wherewith he provok the lord god of israel to anger.

15:31 now the rest of the act of nadab, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel?
15:32 and there wa war between asa and baasha king of israel all
their days.

15:33 In the third year of asa king of judah began baasha the son of
ahijah to reign over all israel in tirzah, twenti and four years.

15:34 and he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walk in the way
of jeroboam, and in hi sin wherewith he made israel to sin.

16:1 then the word of the lord came to jehu the son of hanani against
baasha, saying, 16:2 forasmuch as I exalt thee out of the dust, and
mad thee princ over my peopl israel; and thou hast walk in the
way of jeroboam, and hast made my peopl israel to sin, to provok me
to anger with their sins; 16:3 behold, I will take away the posterity
of baasha, and the poster of hi house; and will make thi house
lik the hous of jeroboam the son of nebat.

16:4 him that dieth of baasha in the citi shall the dog eat; and him
that dieth of hi in the field shall the fowl of the air eat.

16:5 now the rest of the act of baasha, and what he did, and his
might, are they not written in the book of the chronicl of the kings
of israel?  16:6 So baasha slept with hi fathers, and wa buri in
tirzah: and elah hi son reign in hi stead.

16:7 and also by the hand of the prophet jehu the son of hanani came
th word of the lord against baasha, and against hi house, even for
al the evil that he did in the sight of the lord, in provok him to
ang with the work of hi hands, in be like the hous of jeroboam;
and becaus he kill him.

16:8 In the twenti and sixth year of asa king of judah began elah the
son of baasha to reign over israel in tirzah, two years.

16:9 and hi servant zimri, captain of half hi chariots, conspired
against him, as he wa in tirzah, drink himself drunk in the house
of arza steward of hi hous in tirzah.

16:10 and zimri went in and smote him, and kill him, in the twenty
and seventh year of asa king of judah, and reign in hi stead.

16:11 and it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat
on hi throne, that he slew all the hous of baasha: he left him not
on that pisseth against a wall, neither of hi kinsfolks, nor of his
friends.

16:12 thu did zimri destroy all the hous of baasha, accord to the
word of the lord, which he spake against baasha by jehu the prophet.

16:13 for all the sin of baasha, and the sin of elah hi son, by
which they sinned, and by which they made israel to sin, in provoking
th lord god of israel to anger with their vanities.

16:14 now the rest of the act of elah, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel?
16:15 In the twenti and seventh year of asa king of judah did zimri
reign seven day in tirzah. and the peopl were encamp against
gibbethon, which belong to the philistines.

16:16 and the peopl that were encamp heard say, zimri hath
conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefor all israel made
omri, the captain of the host, king over israel that day in the camp.

16:17 and omri went up from gibbethon, and all israel with him, and
they besieg tirzah.

16:18 and it came to pass, when zimri saw that the citi wa taken,
that he went into the palac of the king' house, and burnt the king's
hous over him with fire, and died.

16:19 for hi sin which he sin in do evil in the sight of the
lord, in walk in the way of jeroboam, and in hi sin which he did,
to make israel to sin.

16:20 now the rest of the act of zimri, and hi treason that he
wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicl of the
k of israel?  16:21 then were the peopl of israel divid into
two parts: half of the peopl follow tibni the son of ginath, to
mak him king; and half follow omri.

16:22 but the peopl that follow omri prevail against the people
that follow tibni the son of ginath: so tibni died, and omri
reigned.

16:23 In the thirti and first year of asa king of judah began omri to
reign over israel, twelv years: six year reign he in tirzah.

16:24 and he bought the hill samaria of shemer for two talent of
silver, and built on the hill, and call the name of the citi which
h built, after the name of shemer, owner of the hill, samaria.

16:25 but omri wrought evil in the eye of the lord, and did worse
than all that were befor him.

16:26 for he walk in all the way of jeroboam the son of nebat, and
in hi sin wherewith he made israel to sin, to provok the lord god of
israel to anger with their vanities.

16:27 now the rest of the act of omri which he did, and hi might
that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicl of
th king of israel?  16:28 So omri slept with hi fathers, and was
buri in samaria: and ahab hi son reign in hi stead.

16:29 and in the thirti and eighth year of asa king of judah began
ahab the son of omri to reign over israel: and ahab the son of omri
reign over israel in samaria twenti and two years.

16:30 and ahab the son of omri did evil in the sight of the lord above
al that were befor him.

16:31 and it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to
walk in the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat, that he took to wife
jezebel the daughter of ethbaal king of the zidonians, and went and
serv baal, and worship him.

16:32 and he rear up an altar for baal in the hous of baal, which
h had built in samaria.

16:33 and ahab made a grove; and ahab did more to provok the lord god
of israel to anger than all the king of israel that were befor him.

16:34 In hi day did hiel the bethelit build jericho: he laid the
found thereof in abiram hi firstborn, and set up the gates
thereof in hi youngest son segub, accord to the word of the lord,
which he spake by joshua the son of nun.

17:1 and elijah the tishbite, who wa of the inhabit of gilead,
said unto ahab, As the lord god of israel liveth, befor whom I stand,
ther shall not be dew nor rain these years, but accord to my word.

17:2 and the word of the lord came unto him, saying, 17:3 get thee
hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook cherith,
that is befor jordan.

17:4 and it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have
command the raven to feed thee there.

17:5 So he went and did accord unto the word of the lord: for he
went and dwelt by the brook cherith, that is befor jordan.

17:6 and the raven brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and
bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.

17:7 and it came to pass after a while, that the brook dri up,
becaus there had been no rain in the land.

17:8 and the word of the lord came unto him, saying, 17:9 arise, get
the to zarephath, which belongeth to zidon, and dwell there: behold,
i have command a widow woman there to sustain thee.

17:10 So he aros and went to zarephath. and when he came to the gate
of the city, behold, the widow woman wa there gather of sticks:
and he call to her, and said, fetch me, I pray thee, a littl water
in a vessel, that I may drink.

17:11 and as she wa go to fetch it, he call to her, and said,
br me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.

17:12 and she said, As the lord thi god liveth, I have not a cake, but
an hand of meal in a barrel, and a littl oil in a cruse: and,
behold, I am gather two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for
m and my son, that we may eat it, and die.

17:13 and elijah said unto her, fear not; go and do as thou hast said:
but make me thereof a littl cake first, and bring it unto me, and
aft make for thee and for thi son.

17:14 for thu saith the lord god of israel, the barrel of meal shall
not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the
lord sendeth rain upon the earth.

17:15 and she went and did accord to the say of elijah: and she,
and he, and her house, did eat mani days.

17:16 and the barrel of meal wast not, neither did the cruse of oil
fail, accord to the word of the lord, which he spake by elijah.

17:17 and it came to pass after these things, that the son of the
woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and hi sick wa so
sore, that there wa no breath left in him.

17:18 and she said unto elijah, what have I to do with thee, O thou
man of god? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and
to slay my son?  17:19 and he said unto her, give me thi son. and he
took him out of her bosom, and carri him up into a loft, where he
abode, and laid him upon hi own bed.

17:20 and he cri unto the lord, and said, O lord my god, hast thou
also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slay her
son?  17:21 and he stretch himself upon the child three times, and
cri unto the lord, and said, O lord my god, I pray thee, let this
child' soul come into him again.

17:22 and the lord heard the voic of elijah; and the soul of the
child came into him again, and he revived.

17:23 and elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the
chamb into the house, and deliv him unto hi mother: and elijah
said, see, thi son liveth.

17:24 and the woman said to elijah, now by thi I know that thou art a
man of god, and that the word of the lord in thi mouth is truth.

18:1 and it came to pass after mani days, that the word of the lord
cam to elijah in the third year, saying, go, shew thyself unto ahab;
and I will send rain upon the earth.

18:2 and elijah went to shew himself unto ahab. and there wa a sore
famin in samaria.

18:3 and ahab call obadiah, which wa the governor of hi house.
(now obadiah fear the lord greatly: 18:4 for it wa so, when jezebel
cut off the prophet of the lord, that obadiah took an hundred
prophets, and hid them by fifti in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water.)  18:5 and ahab said unto obadiah, Go into the land, unto all
fountain of water, and unto all brooks: peradventur we may find
grass to save the hors and mule alive, that we lose not all the
beasts.

18:6 So they divid the land between them to pass throughout it: ahab
w one way by himself, and obadiah went anoth way by himself.

18:7 and as obadiah wa in the way, behold, elijah met him: and he
knew him, and fell on hi face, and said, art thou that my lord
elijah?  18:8 and he answer him, I am: go, tell thi lord, behold,
elijah is here.

18:9 and he said, what have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliv thy
serv into the hand of ahab, to slay me?  18:10 As the lord thi god
liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent
to seek thee: and when they said, He is not there; he took an oath of
th kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.

18:11 and now thou sayest, go, tell thi lord, behold, elijah is here.

18:12 and it shall come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that
th spirit of the lord shall carri thee whither I know not; and so
when I come and tell ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me:
but I thi servant fear the lord from my youth.

18:13 wa it not told my lord what I did when jezebel slew the
prophet of the lord, how I hid an hundr men of the lord' prophets
bi fifti in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?  18:14 and now
thou sayest, go, tell thi lord, behold, elijah is here: and he shall
slay me.

18:15 and elijah said, As the lord of host liveth, befor whom i
stand, I will sure shew myself unto him to day.

18:16 So obadiah went to meet ahab, and told him: and ahab went to
meet elijah.

18:17 and it came to pass, when ahab saw elijah, that ahab said unto
him, art thou he that troubleth israel?  18:18 and he answered, I have
not troubl israel; but thou, and thi father' house, in that ye have
forsaken the command of the lord, and thou hast follow baalim.

18:19 now therefor send, and gather to me all israel unto mount
carmel, and the prophet of baal four hundr and fifty, and the
prophet of the grove four hundred, which eat at jezebel' table.

18:20 So ahab sent unto all the children of israel, and gather the
prophet togeth unto mount carmel.

18:21 and elijah came unto all the people, and said, how long halt ye
between two opinions? if the lord be god, follow him: but if baal,
then follow him. and the peopl answer him not a word.

18:22 then said elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a
prophet of the lord; but baal' prophet are four hundr and fifty
men.

18:23 let them therefor give us two bullocks; and let them choos one
bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and
put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on
wood, and put no fire under: 18:24 and call ye on the name of your
gods, and I will call on the name of the lord: and the god that
answereth by fire, let him be god. and all the peopl answer and
said, It is well spoken.

18:25 and elijah said unto the prophet of baal, choos you one
bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call
on the name of your gods, but put no fire under.

18:26 and they took the bullock which wa given them, and they dressed
it, and call on the name of baal from morn even until noon,
saying, O baal, hear us. but there wa no voice, nor ani that
answered. and they leap upon the altar which wa made.

18:27 and it came to pass at noon, that elijah mock them, and said,
cri aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventur he sleepeth, and must be
awaked.

18:28 and they cri aloud, and cut themselv after their manner with
kniv and lancets, till the blood gush out upon them.

18:29 and it came to pass, when midday wa past, and they prophesied
until the time of the offer of the even sacrifice, that there
wa neither voice, nor ani to answer, nor ani that regarded.

18:30 and elijah said unto all the people, come near unto me. and all
th peopl came near unto him. and he repair the altar of the lord
that wa broken down.

18:31 and elijah took twelv stones, accord to the number of the
trib of the son of jacob, unto whom the word of the lord came,
saying, israel shall be thi name: 18:32 and with the stone he built
an altar in the name of the lord: and he made a trench about the
altar, as great as would contain two measur of seed.

18:33 and he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and
laid him on the wood, and said, fill four barrel with water, and pour
it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

18:34 and he said, Do it the second time. and they did it the second
time.

and he said, Do it the third time. and they did it the third time.

18:35 and the water ran round about the altar; and he fill the
trench also with water.

18:36 and it came to pass at the time of the offer of the evening
sacrifice, that elijah the prophet came near, and said, lord god of
abraham, isaac, and of israel, let it be known thi day that thou art
god in israel, and that I am thi servant, and that I have done all
thes thing at thi word.

18:37 hear me, O lord, hear me, that thi peopl may know that thou
art the lord god, and that thou hast turn their heart back again.

18:38 then the fire of the lord fell, and consum the burnt
sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and lick up
th water that wa in the trench.

18:39 and when all the peopl saw it, they fell on their faces: and
they said, the lord, he is the god; the lord, he is the god.

18:40 and elijah said unto them, take the prophet of baal; let not
on of them escape. and they took them: and elijah brought them down
to the brook kishon, and slew them there.

18:41 and elijah said unto ahab, get thee up, eat and drink; for there
i a sound of abund of rain.

18:42 So ahab went up to eat and to drink. and elijah went up to the
top of carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his
fac between hi knees, 18:43 and said to hi servant, Go up now, look
toward the sea. and he went up, and looked, and said, there is
nothing. and he said, Go again seven times.

18:44 and it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, behold,
ther ariseth a littl cloud out of the sea, like a man' hand. and he
said, Go up, say unto ahab, prepar thi chariot, and get thee down
that the rain stop thee not.

18:45 and it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven wa black
with cloud and wind, and there wa a great rain. and ahab rode, and
went to jezreel.

18:46 and the hand of the lord wa on elijah; and he gird up his
loins, and ran befor ahab to the entranc of jezreel.

19:1 and ahab told jezebel all that elijah had done, and withal how he
had slain all the prophet with the sword.

19:2 then jezebel sent a messeng unto elijah, saying, So let the
god do to me, and more also, if I make not thi life as the life of
on of them by to morrow about thi time.

19:3 and when he saw that, he arose, and went for hi life, and came
to beersheba, which belongeth to judah, and left hi servant there.

19:4 but he himself went a day' journey into the wilderness, and came
and sat down under a junip tree: and he request for himself that
h might die; and said, It is enough; now, O lord, take away my life;
for I am not better than my fathers.

19:5 and as he lay and slept under a junip tree, behold, then an
angel touch him, and said unto him, aris and eat.

19:6 and he looked, and, behold, there wa a cake baken on the coals,
and a cruse of water at hi head. and he did eat and drink, and laid
him down again.

19:7 and the angel of the lord came again the second time, and touched
him, and said, aris and eat; becaus the journey is too great for
thee.

19:8 and he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of
that meat forti day and forti night unto horeb the mount of god.

19:9 and he came thither unto a cave, and lodg there; and, behold,
th word of the lord came to him, and he said unto him, what doest
thou here, elijah?  19:10 and he said, I have been veri jealou for
th lord god of hosts: for the children of israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thi prophet with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:11 and he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount befor the lord.

and, behold, the lord pass by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in piec the rock befor the lord; but the lord
wa not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the lord
wa not in the earthquake: 19:12 and after the earthquak a fire; but
th lord wa not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.

19:13 and it wa so, when elijah heard it, that he wrap hi face in
hi mantle, and went out, and stood in the enter in of the cave.
and, behold, there came a voic unto him, and said, what doest thou
here, elijah?  19:14 and he said, I have been veri jealou for the
lord god of hosts: becaus the children of israel have forsaken thy
covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thi prophet with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away.

19:15 and the lord said unto him, go, return on thi way to the
wild of damascus: and when thou comest, anoint hazael to be king
ov syria: 19:16 and jehu the son of nimshi shalt thou anoint to be
k over israel: and elisha the son of shaphat of abelmeholah shalt
thou anoint to be prophet in thi room.

19:17 and it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of
hazael shall jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of jehu
shal elisha slay.

19:18 yet I have left me seven thousand in israel, all the knee which
hav not bow unto baal, and everi mouth which hath not kiss him.

19:19 So he depart thence, and found elisha the son of shaphat, who
wa plow with twelv yoke of oxen befor him, and he with the
twelfth: and elijah pass by him, and cast hi mantl upon him.

19:20 and he left the oxen, and ran after elijah, and said, let me, i
pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee.
and he said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thee?
19:21 and he return back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew
them, and boil their flesh with the instrument of the oxen, and
gav unto the people, and they did eat. then he arose, and went after
elijah, and minist unto him.

20:1 and benhadad the king of syria gather all hi host together:
and there were thirti and two king with him, and horses, and
chariots; and he went up and besieg samaria, and war against it.

20:2 and he sent messeng to ahab king of israel into the city, and
said unto him, thu saith benhadad, 20:3 thi silver and thi gold is
mine; thi wive also and thi children, even the goodliest, are mine.

20:4 and the king of israel answer and said, My lord, O king,
accord to thi saying, I am thine, and all that I have.

20:5 and the messeng came again, and said, thu speaketh benhadad,
saying, although I have sent unto thee, saying, thou shalt deliv me
thi silver, and thi gold, and thi wives, and thi children; 20:6 yet i
wil send my servant unto thee to morrow about thi time, and they
shal search thine house, and the hous of thi servants; and it shall
be, that whatsoev is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in
their hand, and take it away.

20:7 then the king of israel call all the elder of the land, and
said, mark, I pray you, and see how thi man seeketh mischief: for he
sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and
for my gold; and I deni him not.

20:8 and all the elder and all the peopl said unto him, hearken not
unto him, nor consent.

20:9 wherefor he said unto the messeng of benhadad, tell my lord
th king, all that thou didst send for to thi servant at the first i
wil do: but thi thing I may not do. and the messeng departed, and
brought him word again.

20:10 and benhadad sent unto him, and said, the god do so unto me,
and more also, if the dust of samaria shall suffic for hand for
al the peopl that follow me.

20:11 and the king of israel answer and said, tell him, let not him
that girdeth on hi har boast himself as he that putteth it off.

20:12 and it came to pass, when ben-hadad heard thi message, as he
wa drinking, he and the king in the pavilions, that he said unto his
servants, set yourselv in array. and they set themselv in array
against the city.

20:13 and, behold, there came a prophet unto ahab king of israel,
saying, thu saith the lord, hast thou seen all thi great multitude?
behold, I will deliv it into thine hand thi day; and thou shalt
know that I am the lord.

20:14 and ahab said, By whom? and he said, thu saith the lord, even
bi the young men of the princ of the provinces. then he said, who
shal order the battle? and he answered, thou.

20:15 then he number the young men of the princ of the provinces,
and they were two hundr and thirti two: and after them he numbered
al the people, even all the children of israel, be seven thousand.

20:16 and they went out at noon. but benhadad wa drink himself
drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirti and two kings
that help him.

20:17 and the young men of the princ of the provinc went out
first; and benhadad sent out, and they told him, saying, there are men
com out of samaria.

20:18 and he said, whether they be come out for peace, take them
alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive.

20:19 So these young men of the princ of the provinc came out of
th city, and the armi which follow them.

20:20 and they slew everi one hi man: and the syrian fled; and
israel pursu them: and benhadad the king of syria escap on an
hors with the horsemen.

20:21 and the king of israel went out, and smote the hors and
chariots, and slew the syrian with a great slaughter.

20:22 and the prophet came to the king of israel, and said unto him,
go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the
return of the year the king of syria will come up against thee.

20:23 and the servant of the king of syria said unto him, their gods
ar god of the hills; therefor they were stronger than we; but let
u fight against them in the plain, and sure we shall be stronger
than they.

20:24 and do thi thing, take the king away, everi man out of his
place, and put captain in their rooms: 20:25 and number thee an army,
lik the armi that thou hast lost, hors for horse, and chariot for
chariot: and we will fight against them in the plain, and sure we
shal be stronger than they. and he hearken unto their voice, and
did so.

20:26 and it came to pass at the return of the year, that benhadad
numb the syrians, and went up to aphek, to fight against israel.

20:27 and the children of israel were numbered, and were all present,
and went against them: and the children of israel pitch befor them
lik two littl flock of kids; but the syrian fill the country.

20:28 and there came a man of god, and spake unto the king of israel,
and said, thu saith the lord, becaus the syrian have said, the lord
i god of the hills, but he is not god of the valleys, therefor will
i deliv all thi great multitud into thine hand, and ye shall know
that I am the lord.

20:29 and they pitch one over against the other seven days. and so
it was, that in the seventh day the battl wa joined: and the
children of israel slew of the syrian an hundr thousand footmen in
on day.

20:30 but the rest fled to aphek, into the city; and there a wall fell
upon twenti and seven thousand of the men that were left. and benhadad
fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.

20:31 and hi servant said unto him, behold now, we have heard that
th king of the hous of israel are merci kings: let us, I pray
thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and rope upon our heads, and go out
to the king of israel: peradventur he will save thi life.

20:32 So they gird sackcloth on their loins, and put rope on their
heads, and came to the king of israel, and said, thi servant benhadad
saith, I pray thee, let me live. and he said, Is he yet alive? he is
mi brother.

20:33 now the men did dilig observ whether ani thing would come
from him, and did hastili catch it: and they said, thi brother
benhadad. then he said, Go ye, bring him. then benhadad came forth to
him; and he caus him to come up into the chariot.

20:34 and ben-hadad said unto him, the cities, which my father took
from thi father, I will restore; and thou shalt make street for thee
in damascus, as my father made in samaria. then said ahab, I will send
the away with thi covenant. So he made a coven with him, and sent
him away.

20:35 and a certain man of the son of the prophet said unto his
neighbour in the word of the lord, smite me, I pray thee. and the man
refus to smite him.

20:36 then said he unto him, becaus thou hast not obey the voic of
th lord, behold, as soon as thou art depart from me, a lion shall
slay thee.

and as soon as he wa depart from him, a lion found him, and slew
him.

20:37 then he found anoth man, and said, smite me, I pray thee. and
th man smote him, so that in smite he wound him.

20:38 So the prophet departed, and wait for the king by the way, and
disguis himself with ash upon hi face.

20:39 and as the king pass by, he cri unto the king: and he said,
thi servant went out into the midst of the battle; and, behold, a man
turn aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, keep thi man: if
bi ani mean he be missing, then shall thi life be for hi life, or
els thou shalt pay a talent of silver.

20:40 and as thi servant wa busi here and there, he wa gone. and the
k of israel said unto him, So shall thi judgment be; thyself hast
decid it.

20:41 and he hasted, and took the ash away from hi face; and the
k of israel discern him that he wa of the prophets.

20:42 and he said unto him, thu saith the lord, becaus thou hast let
go out of thi hand a man whom I appoint to utter destruction,
therefor thi life shall go for hi life, and thi peopl for his
people.

20:43 and the king of israel went to hi hous heavi and displeased,
and came to samaria.

21:1 and it came to pass after these things, that naboth the
jezreelit had a vineyard, which wa in jezreel, hard by the palac of
ahab king of samaria.

21:2 and ahab spake unto naboth, saying, give me thi vineyard, that i
may have it for a garden of herbs, becaus it is near unto my house:
and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem
good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.

21:3 and naboth said to ahab, the lord forbid it me, that I should
giv the inherit of my father unto thee.

21:4 and ahab came into hi hous heavi and displeas becaus of the
word which naboth the jezreelit had spoken to him: for he had said, i
wil not give thee the inherit of my fathers. and he laid him down
upon hi bed, and turn away hi face, and would eat no bread.

21:5 but jezebel hi wife came to him, and said unto him, whi is thy
spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?  21:6 and he said unto her,
becaus I spake unto naboth the jezreelite, and said unto him, give me
thi vineyard for money; or else, if it pleas thee, I will give thee
anoth vineyard for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my
vineyard.

21:7 and jezebel hi wife said unto him, dost thou now govern the
kingdom of israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry:
i will give thee the vineyard of naboth the jezreelite.

21:8 So she wrote letter in ahab' name, and seal them with his
seal, and sent the letter unto the elder and to the nobl that were
in hi city, dwell with naboth.

21:9 and she wrote in the letters, saying, proclaim a fast, and set
naboth on high among the people: 21:10 and set two men, son of
belial, befor him, to bear wit against him, saying, thou didst
blasphem god and the king. and then carri him out, and stone him,
that he may die.

21:11 and the men of hi city, even the elder and the nobl who were
th inhabit in hi city, did as jezebel had sent unto them, and as
it wa written in the letter which she had sent unto them.

21:12 they proclaim a fast, and set naboth on high among the people.

21:13 and there came in two men, children of belial, and sat before
him: and the men of belial wit against him, even against naboth,
in the presenc of the people, saying, naboth did blasphem god and
th king. then they carri him forth out of the city, and stone him
with stones, that he died.

21:14 then they sent to jezebel, saying, naboth is stoned, and is
dead.

21:15 and it came to pass, when jezebel heard that naboth wa stoned,
and wa dead, that jezebel said to ahab, arise, take possess of the
vineyard of naboth the jezreelite, which he refus to give thee for
money: for naboth is not alive, but dead.

21:16 and it came to pass, when ahab heard that naboth wa dead, that
ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of naboth the jezreelite, to
tak possess of it.

21:17 and the word of the lord came to elijah the tishbite, saying,
21:18 arise, go down to meet ahab king of israel, which is in samaria:
behold, he is in the vineyard of naboth, whither he is gone down to
possess it.

21:19 and thou shalt speak unto him, saying, thu saith the lord, hast
thou killed, and also taken possession? and thou shalt speak unto him,
saying, thu saith the lord, In the place where dog lick the blood
of naboth shall dog lick thi blood, even thine.

21:20 and ahab said to elijah, hast thou found me, O mine enemy? and
h answered, I have found thee: becaus thou hast sold thyself to work
evil in the sight of the lord.

21:21 behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
posterity, and will cut off from ahab him that pisseth against the
wall, and him that is shut up and left in israel, 21:22 and will make
thin hous like the hous of jeroboam the son of nebat, and like the
hous of baasha the son of ahijah, for the provoc wherewith thou
hast provok me to anger, and made israel to sin.

21:23 and of jezebel also spake the lord, saying, the dog shall eat
jezebel by the wall of jezreel.

21:24 him that dieth of ahab in the citi the dog shall eat; and him
that dieth in the field shall the fowl of the air eat.

21:25 but there wa none like unto ahab, which did sell himself to
work wicked in the sight of the lord, whom jezebel hi wife
stir up.

21:26 and he did veri abomin in follow idols, accord to all
th as did the amorites, whom the lord cast out befor the children
of israel.

21:27 and it came to pass, when ahab heard those words, that he rent
hi clothes, and put sackcloth upon hi flesh, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly.

21:28 and the word of the lord came to elijah the tishbite, saying,
21:29 seest thou how ahab humbleth himself befor me? becaus he
humbleth himself befor me, I will not bring the evil in hi days: but
in hi son' day will I bring the evil upon hi house.

22:1 and they continu three year without war between syria and
israel.

22:2 and it came to pass in the third year, that jehoshaphat the king
of judah came down to the king of israel.

22:3 and the king of israel said unto hi servants, know ye that
ramoth in gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the
hand of the king of syria?  22:4 and he said unto jehoshaphat, wilt
thou go with me to battl to ramothgilead? and jehoshaphat said to the
k of israel, I am as thou art, my peopl as thi people, my horses
a thi horses.

22:5 and jehoshaphat said unto the king of israel, enquire, I pray
thee, at the word of the lord to day.

22:6 then the king of israel gather the prophet together, about
four hundr men, and said unto them, shall I go against ramothgilead
to battle, or shall I forbear? and they said, Go up; for the lord
shal deliv it into the hand of the king.

22:7 and jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the lord
besides, that we might enquir of him?  22:8 and the king of israel
said unto jehoshaphat, there is yet one man, micaiah the son of imlah,
bi whom we may enquir of the lord: but I hate him; for he doth not
prophesi good concern me, but evil. and jehoshaphat said, let not
th king say so.

22:9 then the king of israel call an officer, and said, hasten
hith micaiah the son of imlah.

22:10 and the king of israel and jehoshaphat the king of judah sat
each on hi throne, have put on their robes, in a void place in the
entr of the gate of samaria; and all the prophet prophesied
befor them.

22:11 and zedekiah the son of chenaanah made him horn of iron: and he
said, thu saith the lord, with these shalt thou push the syrians,
until thou have consum them.

22:12 and all the prophet prophesi so, saying, Go up to
ramothgilead, and prosper: for the lord shall deliv it into the
king' hand.

22:13 and the messeng that wa gone to call micaiah spake unto him,
saying, behold now, the word of the prophet declar good unto the
k with one mouth: let thi word, I pray thee, be like the word of
on of them, and speak that which is good.

22:14 and micaiah said, As the lord liveth, what the lord saith unto
me, that will I speak.

22:15 So he came to the king. and the king said unto him, micaiah,
shal we go against ramothgilead to battle, or shall we forbear? and
h answer him, go, and prosper: for the lord shall deliv it into
th hand of the king.

22:16 and the king said unto him, how mani time shall I adjur thee
that thou tell me noth but that which is true in the name of the
lord?  22:17 and he said, I saw all israel scatter upon the hills,
a sheep that have not a shepherd: and the lord said, these have no
master: let them return everi man to hi hous in peace.

22:18 and the king of israel said unto jehoshaphat, did I not tell
the that he would prophesi no good concern me, but evil?  22:19
and he said, hear thou therefor the word of the lord: I saw the lord
sit on hi throne, and all the host of heaven stand by him on
hi right hand and on hi left.

22:20 and the lord said, who shall persuad ahab, that he may go up
and fall at ramothgilead? and one said on thi manner, and another
said on that manner.

22:21 and there came forth a spirit, and stood befor the lord, and
said, I will persuad him.

22:22 and the lord said unto him, wherewith? and he said, I will go
forth, and I will be a lie spirit in the mouth of all hi prophets.
and he said, thou shalt persud him, and prevail also: go forth, and
do so.

22:23 now therefore, behold, the lord hath put a lie spirit in the
mouth of all these thi prophets, and the lord hath spoken evil
concern thee.

22:24 but zedekiah the son of chenaanah went near, and smote micaiah
on the cheek, and said, which way went the spirit of the lord from me
to speak unto thee?  22:25 and micaiah said, behold, thou shalt see in
that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

22:26 and the king of israel said, take micaiah, and carri him back
unto amon the governor of the city, and to joash the king' son; 22:27
and say, thu saith the king, put thi fellow in the prison, and feed
him with bread of afflict and with water of affliction, until i
com in peace.

22:28 and micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, the lord hath
not spoken by me. and he said, hearken, O people, everi one of you.

22:29 So the king of israel and jehoshaphat the king of judah went up
to ramothgilead.

22:30 and the king of israel said unto jehoshaphat, I will disguise
myself, and enter into the battle; but put thou on thi robes. and the
k of israel disguis himself, and went into the battle.

22:31 but the king of syria command hi thirti and two captain that
had rule over hi chariots, saying, fight neither with small nor
great, save onli with the king of israel.

22:32 and it came to pass, when the captain of the chariot saw
jehoshaphat, that they said, sure it is the king of israel. and they
turn asid to fight against him: and jehoshaphat cri out.

22:33 and it came to pass, when the captain of the chariot perceived
that it wa not the king of israel, that they turn back from
pursu him.

22:34 and a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
israel between the joint of the harness: wherefor he said unto the
driv of hi chariot, turn thine hand, and carri me out of the host;
for I am wounded.

22:35 and the battl increas that day: and the king wa stay up in
hi chariot against the syrians, and die at even: and the blood ran
out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.

22:36 and there went a proclam throughout the host about the
go down of the sun, saying, everi man to hi city, and everi man to
hi own country.

22:37 So the king died, and wa brought to samaria; and they buried
th king in samaria.

22:38 and one wash the chariot in the pool of samaria; and the dogs
lick up hi blood; and they wash hi armour; accord unto the
word of the lord which he spake.

22:39 now the rest of the act of ahab, and all that he did, and the
ivori hous which he made, and all the citi that he built, are they
not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel?
22:40 So ahab slept with hi fathers; and ahaziah hi son reign in
hi stead.

22:41 and jehoshaphat the son of asa began to reign over judah in the
fourth year of ahab king of israel.

22:42 jehoshaphat wa thirti and five year old when he began to
reign; and he reign twenti and five year in jerusalem. and his
mother' name wa azubah the daughter of shilhi.

22:43 and he walk in all the way of asa hi father; he turn not
asid from it, do that which wa right in the eye of the lord:
nevertheless the high place were not taken away; for the people
off and burnt incens yet in the high places.

22:44 and jehoshaphat made peac with the king of israel.

22:45 now the rest of the act of jehoshaphat, and hi might that he
shewed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the
chronicl of the king of judah?  22:46 and the remnant of the
sodomites, which remain in the day of hi father asa, he took out
of the land.

22:47 there wa then no king in edom: a deputi wa king.

22:48 jehoshaphat made ship of tharshish to go to ophir for gold: but
they went not; for the ship were broken at eziongeber.

22:49 then said ahaziah the son of ahab unto jehoshaphat, let my
serv go with thi servant in the ships. but jehoshaphat would not.

22:50 and jehoshaphat slept with hi fathers, and wa buri with his
fath in the citi of david hi father: and jehoram hi son reigned
in hi stead.

22:51 ahaziah the son of ahab began to reign over israel in samaria
th seventeenth year of jehoshaphat king of judah, and reign two
year over israel.

22:52 and he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walk in the way
of hi father, and in the way of hi mother, and in the way of
jeroboam the son of nebat, who made israel to sin: 22:53 for he served
baal, and worship him, and provok to anger the lord god of
israel, accord to all that hi father had done.




th second book of the kings

commonli called:

th fourth book of the kings


1:1 then moab rebel against israel after the death of ahab.

1:2 and ahaziah fell down through a lattic in hi upper chamber that
wa in samaria, and wa sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto
them, go, enquir of baalzebub the god of ekron whether I shall
recov of thi disease.

1:3 but the angel of the lord said to elijah the tishbite, arise, go
up to meet the messeng of the king of samaria, and say unto them,
i it not becaus there is not a god in israel, that ye go to enquire
of baalzebub the god of ekron?  1:4 now therefor thu saith the lord,
thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt sure die. and elijah departed.

1:5 and when the messeng turn back unto him, he said unto them,
whi are ye now turn back?  1:6 and they said unto him, there came a
man up to meet us, and said unto us, go, turn again unto the king that
sent you, and say unto him, thu saith the lord, Is it not because
ther is not a god in israel, that thou sendest to enquir of
baalzebub the god of ekron? therefor thou shalt not come down from
that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt sure die.

1:7 and he said unto them, what manner of man wa he which came up to
meet you, and told you these words?  1:8 and they answer him, He was
an hairi man, and girt with a girdl of leather about hi loins. and
h said, It is elijah the tishbite.

1:9 then the king sent unto him a captain of fifti with hi fifty. and
h went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. and he
spak unto him, thou man of god, the king hath said, come down.

1:10 and elijah answer and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a
man of god, then let fire come down from heaven, and consum thee and
thi fifty.

and there came down fire from heaven, and consum him and hi fifty.

1:11 again also he sent unto him anoth captain of fifti with his
fifty.

and he answer and said unto him, O man of god, thu hath the king
said, come down quickly.

1:12 and elijah answer and said unto them, If I be a man of god, let
fir come down from heaven, and consum thee and thi fifty. and the
fir of god came down from heaven, and consum him and hi fifty.

1:13 and he sent again a captain of the third fifti with hi fifty.
and the third captain of fifti went up, and came and fell on hi knees
befor elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, O man of god, i
pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifti thi servants, be
preci in thi sight.

1:14 behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two
captain of the former fifti with their fifties: therefor let my
lif now be preciou in thi sight.

1:15 and the angel of the lord said unto elijah, Go down with him: be
not afraid of him. and he arose, and went down with him unto the king.

1:16 and he said unto him, thu saith the lord, forasmuch as thou hast
sent messeng to enquir of baalzebub the god of ekron, is it not
becaus there is no god in israel to enquir of hi word? therefore
th shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt sure die.

1:17 So he die accord to the word of the lord which elijah had
spoken.

and jehoram reign in hi stead in the second year of jehoram the son
of jehoshaphat king of judah; becaus he had no son.

1:18 now the rest of the act of ahaziah which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel?  2:1 and
it came to pass, when the lord would take up elijah into heaven by a
whirlwind, that elijah went with elisha from gilgal.

2:2 and elijah said unto elisha, tarri here, I pray thee; for the lord
hath sent me to bethel. and elisha said unto him, As the lord liveth,
and as thi soul liveth, I will not leav thee. So they went down to
bethel.

2:3 and the son of the prophet that were at bethel came forth to
elisha, and said unto him, knowest thou that the lord will take away
thi master from thi head to day? and he said, yea, I know it; hold ye
your peace.

2:4 and elijah said unto him, elisha, tarri here, I pray thee; for the
lord hath sent me to jericho. and he said, As the lord liveth, and as
thi soul liveth, I will not leav thee. So they came to jericho.

2:5 and the son of the prophet that were at jericho came to elisha,
and said unto him, knowest thou that the lord will take away thy
mast from thi head to day? and he answered, yea, I know it; hold ye
your peace.

2:6 and elijah said unto him, tarry, I pray thee, here; for the lord
hath sent me to jordan. and he said, As the lord liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leav thee. and they two went on.

2:7 and fifti men of the son of the prophet went, and stood to view
afar off: and they two stood by jordan.

2:8 and elijah took hi mantle, and wrap it together, and smote the
waters, and they were divid hither and thither, so that they two
went over on dri ground.

2:9 and it came to pass, when they were gone over, that elijah said
unto elisha, ask what I shall do for thee, befor I be taken away from
thee. and elisha said, I pray thee, let a doubl portion of thi spirit
b upon me.

2:10 and he said, thou hast ask a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou
se me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if
not, it shall not be so.

2:11 and it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that,
behold, there appear a chariot of fire, and hors of fire, and
part them both asunder; and elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven.

2:12 and elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the
chariot of israel, and the horsemen thereof. and he saw him no more:
and he took hold of hi own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.

2:13 He took up also the mantl of elijah that fell from him, and went
back, and stood by the bank of jordan; 2:14 and he took the mantl of
elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, where is
th lord god of elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they
part hither and thither: and elisha went over.

2:15 and when the son of the prophet which were to view at jericho
saw him, they said, the spirit of elijah doth rest on elisha. and they
cam to meet him, and bow themselv to the ground befor him.

2:16 and they said unto him, behold now, there be with thi servants
fifti strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thi master: lest
peradventur the spirit of the lord hath taken him up, and cast him
upon some mountain, or into some valley. and he said, Ye shall not
send.

2:17 and when they urg him till he wa ashamed, he said, send. they
sent therefor fifti men; and they sought three days, but found him
not.

2:18 and when they came again to him, (for he tarri at jericho,) he
said unto them, did I not say unto you, Go not?  2:19 and the men of
th citi said unto elisha, behold, I pray thee, the situat of this
citi is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the water is naught, and the
ground barren.

2:20 and he said, bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. and they
brought it to him.

2:21 and he went forth unto the spring of the waters, and cast the
salt in there, and said, thu saith the lord, I have heal these
waters; there shall not be from thenc ani more death or barren land.

2:22 So the water were heal unto thi day, accord to the saying
of elisha which he spake.

2:23 and he went up from thenc unto bethel: and as he wa go up by
th way, there came forth littl children out of the city, and mocked
him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head.

2:24 and he turn back, and look on them, and curs them in the
nam of the lord. and there came forth two she bear out of the wood,
and tare forti and two children of them.

2:25 and he went from thenc to mount carmel, and from thenc he
return to samaria.

3:1 now jehoram the son of ahab began to reign over israel in samaria
th eighteenth year of jehoshaphat king of judah, and reign twelve
years.

3:2 and he wrought evil in the sight of the lord; but not like his
father, and like hi mother: for he put away the imag of baal that
hi father had made.

3:3 nevertheless he cleav unto the sin of jeroboam the son of
nebat, which made israel to sin; he depart not therefrom.

3:4 and mesha king of moab wa a sheepmaster, and render unto the
k of israel an hundr thousand lambs, and an hundr thousand
rams, with the wool.

3:5 but it came to pass, when ahab wa dead, that the king of moab
rebel against the king of israel.

3:6 and king jehoram went out of samaria the same time, and numbered
al israel.

3:7 and he went and sent to jehoshaphat the king of judah, saying, the
k of moab hath rebel against me: wilt thou go with me against
moab to battle? and he said, I will go up: I am as thou art, my people
a thi people, and my hors as thi horses.

3:8 and he said, which way shall we go up? and he answered, the way
through the wilder of edom.

3:9 So the king of israel went, and the king of judah, and the king of
edom: and they fetch a compass of seven days' journey: and there was
no water for the host, and for the cattl that follow them.

3:10 and the king of israel said, alas! that the lord hath called
thes three king together, to deliv them into the hand of moab!
3:11 but jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the lord,
that we may enquir of the lord by him? and one of the king of
israel' servant answer and said, here is elisha the son of
shaphat, which pour water on the hand of elijah.

3:12 and jehoshaphat said, the word of the lord is with him. So the
k of israel and jehoshaphat and the king of edom went down to him.

3:13 and elisha said unto the king of israel, what have I to do with
thee?  get thee to the prophet of thi father, and to the prophet of
thi mother.

and the king of israel said unto him, nay: for the lord hath called
thes three king together, to deliv them into the hand of moab.

3:14 and elisha said, As the lord of host liveth, befor whom i
stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presenc of jehoshaphat
th king of judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.

3:15 but now bring me a minstrel. and it came to pass, when the
minstrel played, that the hand of the lord came upon him.

3:16 and he said, thu saith the lord, make thi valley full of
ditches.

3:17 for thu saith the lord, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye
se rain; yet that valley shall be fill with water, that ye may
drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.

3:18 and thi is but a light thing in the sight of the lord: he will
deliv the moabit also into your hand.

3:19 and ye shall smite everi fenc city, and everi choic city, and
shal fell everi good tree, and stop all well of water, and mar every
good piec of land with stones.

3:20 and it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offer was
offered, that, behold, there came water by the way of edom, and the
countri wa fill with water.

3:21 and when all the moabit heard that the king were come up to
fight against them, they gather all that were abl to put on armour,
and upward, and stood in the border.

3:22 and they rose up earli in the morning, and the sun shone upon the
water, and the moabit saw the water on the other side as red as
blood: 3:23 and they said, thi is blood: the king are sure slain,
and they have smitten one another: now therefore, moab, to the spoil.

3:24 and when they came to the camp of israel, the israelit rose up
and smote the moabites, so that they fled befor them: but they went
forward smite the moabites, even in their country.

3:25 and they beat down the cities, and on everi good piec of land
cast everi man hi stone, and fill it; and they stop all the
wel of water, and fell all the good trees: onli in kirharaseth
left they the stone thereof; howbeit the slinger went about it, and
smot it.

3:26 and when the king of moab saw that the battl wa too sore for
him, he took with him seven hundr men that drew swords, to break
through even unto the king of edom: but they could not.

3:27 then he took hi eldest son that should have reign in his
stead, and offer him for a burnt offer upon the wall. and there
wa great indign against israel: and they depart from him, and
return to their own land.

4:1 now there cri a certain woman of the wive of the son of the
prophet unto elisha, saying, thi servant my husband is dead; and thou
knowest that thi servant did fear the lord: and the creditor is come
to take unto him my two son to be bondmen.

4:2 and elisha said unto her, what shall I do for thee? tell me, what
hast thou in the house? and she said, thine handmaid hath not any
th in the house, save a pot of oil.

4:3 then he said, go, borrow thee vessel abroad of all thy
neighbours, even empti vessels; borrow not a few.

4:4 and when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and
upon thi sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou
shalt set asid that which is full.

4:5 So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her
sons, who brought the vessel to her; and she pour out.

4:6 and it came to pass, when the vessel were full, that she said
unto her son, bring me yet a vessel. and he said unto her, there is
not a vessel more. and the oil stayed.

4:7 then she came and told the man of god. and he said, go, sell the
oil, and pay thi debt, and live thou and thi children of the rest.

4:8 and it fell on a day, that elisha pass to shunem, where wa a
great woman; and she constrain him to eat bread. and so it was, that
a oft as he pass by, he turn in thither to eat bread.

4:9 and she said unto her husband, behold now, I perceiv that thi is
an holi man of god, which passeth by us continually.

4:10 let us make a littl chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let
u set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a
candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn
in thither.

4:11 and it fell on a day, that he came thither, and he turn into
th chamber, and lay there.

4:12 and he said to gehazi hi servant, call thi shunammite. and when
h had call her, she stood befor him.

4:13 and he said unto him, say now unto her, behold, thou hast been
car for us with all thi care; what is to be done for thee?
wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the
host? and she answered, I dwell among mine own people.

4:14 and he said, what then is to be done for her? and gehazi
answered, verili she hath no child, and her husband is old.

4:15 and he said, call her. and when he had call her, she stood in
th door.

4:16 and he said, about thi season, accord to the time of life,
th shalt embrac a son. and she said, nay, my lord, thou man of god,
do not lie unto thine handmaid.

4:17 and the woman conceived, and bare a son at that season that
elisha had said unto her, accord to the time of life.

4:18 and when the child wa grown, it fell on a day, that he went out
to hi father to the reapers.

4:19 and he said unto hi father, My head, my head. and he said to a
lad, carri him to hi mother.

4:20 and when he had taken him, and brought him to hi mother, he sat
on her knee till noon, and then died.

4:21 and she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of god, and
shut the door upon him, and went out.

4:22 and she call unto her husband, and said, send me, I pray thee,
on of the young men, and one of the asses, that I may run to the man
of god, and come again.

4:23 and he said, wherefor wilt thou go to him to day? it is neither
new moon, nor sabbath. and she said, It shall be well.

4:24 then she saddl an ass, and said to her servant, drive, and go
forward; slack not thi ride for me, except I bid thee.

4:25 So she went and came unto the man of god to mount carmel. and it
cam to pass, when the man of god saw her afar off, that he said to
gehazi hi servant, behold, yonder is that shunammite: 4:26 run now, i
pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with thee? is it
wel with thi husband? is it well with the child? and she answered, it
i well: 4:27 and when she came to the man of god to the hill, she
caught him by the feet: but gehazi came near to thrust her away. and
th man of god said, let her alone; for her soul is vex within her:
and the lord hath hid it from me, and hath not told me.

4:28 then she said, did I desir a son of my lord? did I not say, do
not deceiv me?  4:29 then he said to gehazi, gird up thi loins, and
tak my staff in thine hand, and go thi way: if thou meet ani man,
salut him not; and if ani salut thee, answer him not again: and lay
mi staff upon the face of the child.

4:30 and the mother of the child said, As the lord liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leav thee. and he arose, and follow her.

4:31 and gehazi pass on befor them, and laid the staff upon the
fac of the child; but there wa neither voice, nor hearing. wherefore
h went again to meet him, and told him, saying, the child is not
awaked.

4:32 and when elisha wa come into the house, behold, the child was
dead, and laid upon hi bed.

4:33 He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and
pray unto the lord.

4:34 and he went up, and lay upon the child, and put hi mouth upon
hi mouth, and hi eye upon hi eyes, and hi hand upon hi hands:
and stretch himself upon the child; and the flesh of the child waxed
warm.

4:35 then he returned, and walk in the hous to and fro; and went
up, and stretch himself upon him: and the child sneez seven times,
and the child open hi eyes.

4:36 and he call gehazi, and said, call thi shunammite. So he
cal her. and when she wa come in unto him, he said, take up thy
son.

4:37 then she went in, and fell at hi feet, and bow herself to the
ground, and took up her son, and went out.

4:38 and elisha came again to gilgal: and there wa a dearth in the
land; and the son of the prophet were sit befor him: and he
said unto hi servant, set on the great pot, and seeth pottag for
th son of the prophets.

4:39 and one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild
vine, and gather thereof wild gourd hi lap full, and came and
shr them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.

4:40 So they pour out for the men to eat. and it came to pass, as
they were eat of the pottage, that they cri out, and said, O thou
man of god, there is death in the pot. and they could not eat thereof.

4:41 but he said, then bring meal. and he cast it into the pot; and he
said, pour out for the people, that they may eat. and there wa no
harm in the pot.

4:42 and there came a man from baalshalisha, and brought the man of
god bread of the firstfruits, twenti loav of barley, and full ears
of corn in the husk thereof. and he said, give unto the people, that
they may eat.

4:43 and hi servitor said, what, should I set thi befor an hundred
men?  He said again, give the people, that they may eat: for thus
saith the lord, they shall eat, and shall leav thereof.

4:44 So he set it befor them, and they did eat, and left thereof,
accord to the word of the lord.

5:1 now naaman, captain of the host of the king of syria, wa a great
man with hi master, and honourable, becaus by him the lord had given
deliver unto syria: he wa also a mighti man in valour, but he was
a leper.

5:2 and the syrian had gone out by companies, and had brought away
capt out of the land of israel a littl maid; and she wait on
naaman' wife.

5:3 and she said unto her mistress, would god my lord were with the
prophet that is in samaria! for he would recov him of hi leprosy.

5:4 and one went in, and told hi lord, saying, thu and thu said the
maid that is of the land of israel.

5:5 and the king of syria said, Go to, go, and I will send a letter
unto the king of israel. and he departed, and took with him ten
tal of silver, and six thousand piec of gold, and ten chang of
raiment.

5:6 and he brought the letter to the king of israel, saying, now when
thi letter is come unto thee, behold, I have therewith sent naaman my
serv to thee, that thou mayest recov him of hi leprosy.

5:7 and it came to pass, when the king of israel had read the letter,
that he rent hi clothes, and said, Am I god, to kill and to make
alive, that thi man doth send unto me to recov a man of his
leprosy? wherefor consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a
quarrel against me.

5:8 and it wa so, when elisha the man of god had heard that the king
of israel had rent hi clothes, that he sent to the king, saying,
wherefor hast thou rent thi clothes? let him come now to me, and he
shal know that there is a prophet in israel.

5:9 So naaman came with hi hors and with hi chariot, and stood at
th door of the hous of elisha.

5:10 and elisha sent a messeng unto him, saying, Go and wash in
jordan seven times, and thi flesh shall come again to thee, and thou
shalt be clean.

5:11 but naaman wa wroth, and went away, and said, behold, I thought,
h will sure come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the
lord hi god, and strike hi hand over the place, and recov the
leper.

5:12 are not abana and pharpar, river of damascus, better than all
th water of israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he
turn and went away in a rage.

5:13 and hi servant came near, and spake unto him, and said, my
father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou
not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, wash,
and be clean?  5:14 then went he down, and dip himself seven times
in jordan, accord to the say of the man of god: and hi flesh
cam again like unto the flesh of a littl child, and he wa clean.

5:15 and he return to the man of god, he and all hi company, and
came, and stood befor him: and he said, behold, now I know that there
i no god in all the earth, but in israel: now therefore, I pray thee,
tak a bless of thi servant.

5:16 but he said, As the lord liveth, befor whom I stand, I will
rec none. and he urg him to take it; but he refused.

5:17 and naaman said, shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to
thi servant two mules' burden of earth? for thi servant will
henceforth offer neither burnt offer nor sacrific unto other gods,
but unto the lord.

5:18 In thi thing the lord pardon thi servant, that when my master
goeth into the hous of rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my
hand, and I bow myself in the hous of rimmon: when I bow down myself
in the hous of rimmon, the lord pardon thi servant in thi thing.

5:19 and he said unto him, Go in peace. So he depart from him a
littl way.

5:20 but gehazi, the servant of elisha the man of god, said, behold,
mi master hath spare naaman thi syrian, in not receiv at his
hand that which he brought: but, as the lord liveth, I will run after
him, and take somewhat of him.

5:21 So gehazi follow after naaman. and when naaman saw him running
aft him, he light down from the chariot to meet him, and said, is
al well?  5:22 and he said, all is well. My master hath sent me,
saying, behold, even now there be come to me from mount ephraim two
young men of the son of the prophets: give them, I pray thee, a
tal of silver, and two chang of garments.

5:23 and naaman said, Be content, take two talents. and he urg him,
and bound two talent of silver in two bags, with two chang of
garments, and laid them upon two of hi servants; and they bare them
befor him.

5:24 and when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, and
bestow them in the house: and he let the men go, and they departed.

5:25 but he went in, and stood befor hi master. and elisha said unto
him, whenc comest thou, gehazi? and he said, thi servant went no
whither.

5:26 and he said unto him, went not mine heart with thee, when the man
turn again from hi chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive
money, and to receiv garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards, and
sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?  5:27 the leprosy
therefor of naaman shall cleav unto thee, and unto thi seed for
ever. and he went out from hi presenc a leper as white as snow.

6:1 and the son of the prophet said unto elisha, behold now, the
plac where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.

6:2 let us go, we pray thee, unto jordan, and take thenc everi man a
beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. and he
answered, Go ye.

6:3 and one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thi servants.
and he answered, I will go.

6:4 So he went with them. and when they came to jordan, they cut down
wood.

6:5 but as one wa fell a beam, the axe head fell into the water:
and he cried, and said, alas, master! for it wa borrowed.

6:6 and the man of god said, where fell it? and he shew him the
place.

and he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did
swim.

6:7 therefor said he, take it up to thee. and he put out hi hand,
and took it.

6:8 then the king of syria war against israel, and took counsel
with hi servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.

6:9 and the man of god sent unto the king of israel, saying, beware
that thou pass not such a place; for thither the syrian are come
down.

6:10 and the king of israel sent to the place which the man of god
told him and warn him of, and save himself there, not onc nor
twice.

6:11 therefor the heart of the king of syria wa sore troubl for
thi thing; and he call hi servants, and said unto them, will ye
not shew me which of us is for the king of israel?  6:12 and one of
hi servant said, none, my lord, O king: but elisha, the prophet that
i in israel, telleth the king of israel the word that thou speakest
in thi bedchamber.

6:13 and he said, Go and spi where he is, that I may send and fetch
him.

and it wa told him, saying, behold, he is in dothan.

6:14 therefor sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host:
and they came by night, and compass the citi about.

6:15 and when the servant of the man of god wa risen early, and gone
forth, behold, an host compass the citi both with hors and
chariots. and hi servant said unto him, alas, my master! how shall we
do?  6:16 and he answered, fear not: for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them.

6:17 and elisha prayed, and said, lord, I pray thee, open hi eyes,
that he may see. and the lord open the eye of the young man; and he
saw: and, behold, the mountain wa full of hors and chariot of fire
round about elisha.

6:18 and when they came down to him, elisha pray unto the lord, and
said, smite thi people, I pray thee, with blindness. and he smote
them with blind accord to the word of elisha.

6:19 and elisha said unto them, thi is not the way, neither is this
th city: follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. but
h led them to samaria.

6:20 and it came to pass, when they were come into samaria, that
elisha said, lord, open the eye of these men, that they may see. and
th lord open their eyes, and they saw; and, behold, they were in
th midst of samaria.

6:21 and the king of israel said unto elisha, when he saw them, my
father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them?  6:22 and he answered,
th shalt not smite them: wouldest thou smite those whom thou hast
taken captiv with thi sword and with thi bow? set bread and water
befor them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master.

6:23 and he prepar great provis for them: and when they had eaten
and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. So the
band of syria came no more into the land of israel.

6:24 and it came to pass after this, that benhadad king of syria
gath all hi host, and went up, and besieg samaria.

6:25 and there wa a great famin in samaria: and, behold, they
besieg it, until an ass' head wa sold for fourscor piec of
silver, and the fourth part of a cab of dove' dung for five piec of
silver.

6:26 and as the king of israel wa pass by upon the wall, there
cri a woman unto him, saying, help, my lord, O king.

6:27 and he said, If the lord do not help thee, whenc shall I help
thee?  out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress?  6:28 and the
k said unto her, what aileth thee? and she answered, thi woman
said unto me, give thi son, that we may eat him to day, and we will
eat my son to morrow.

6:29 So we boil my son, and did eat him: and I said unto her on the
next day, give thi son, that we may eat him: and she hath hid her son.

6:30 and it came to pass, when the king heard the word of the woman,
that he rent hi clothes; and he pass by upon the wall, and the
peopl looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon hi flesh.

6:31 then he said, god do so and more also to me, if the head of
elisha the son of shaphat shall stand on him thi day.

6:32 but elisha sat in hi house, and the elder sat with him; and the
k sent a man from befor him: but ere the messeng came to him, he
said to the elders, see ye how thi son of a murder hath sent to
tak away mine head? look, when the messeng cometh, shut the door,
and hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of hi master' feet
behind him?  6:33 and while he yet talk with them, behold, the
messeng came down unto him: and he said, behold, thi evil is of the
lord; what should I wait for the lord ani longer?  7:1 then elisha
said, hear ye the word of the lord; thu saith the lord, To morrow
about thi time shall a measur of fine flour be sold for a shekel,
and two measur of barley for a shekel, in the gate of samaria.

7:2 then a lord on whose hand the king lean answer the man of god,
and said, behold, if the lord would make window in heaven, might this
th be?  and he said, behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but
shalt not eat thereof.

7:3 and there were four leprou men at the enter in of the gate:
and they said one to another, whi sit we here until we die?  7:4 If we
say, We will enter into the city, then the famin is in the city, and
w shall die there: and if we sit still here, we die also. now
therefor come, and let us fall unto the host of the syrians: if they
sav us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but die.

7:5 and they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the
syrians: and when they were come to the uttermost part of the camp of
syria, behold, there wa no man there.

7:6 for the lord had made the host of the syrian to hear a nois of
chariots, and a nois of horses, even the nois of a great host: and
they said one to another, lo, the king of israel hath hire against us
th king of the hittites, and the king of the egyptians, to come
upon us.

7:7 wherefor they aros and fled in the twilight, and left their
tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and
fl for their life.

7:8 and when these leper came to the uttermost part of the camp, they
went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carri thenc silver,
and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and came again, and
ent into anoth tent, and carri thenc also, and went and hid
it.

7:9 then they said one to another, We do not well: thi day is a day
of good tidings, and we hold our peace: if we tarri till the morning
light, some mischief will come upon us: now therefor come, that we
may go and tell the king' household.

7:10 So they came and call unto the porter of the city: and they
told them, saying, We came to the camp of the syrians, and, behold,
ther wa no man there, neither voic of man, but hors tied, and
ass tied, and the tent as they were.

7:11 and he call the porters; and they told it to the king' house
within.

7:12 and the king aros in the night, and said unto hi servants, i
wil now shew you what the syrian have done to us. they know that we
b hungry; therefor are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves
in the field, saying, when they come out of the city, we shall catch
them alive, and get into the city.

7:13 and one of hi servant answer and said, let some take, I pray
thee, five of the hors that remain, which are left in the city,
(behold, they are as all the multitud of israel that are left in it:
behold, I say, they are even as all the multitud of the israelites
that are consumed:) and let us send and see.

7:14 they took therefor two chariot horses; and the king sent after
th host of the syrians, saying, Go and see.

7:15 and they went after them unto jordan: and, lo, all the way was
ful of garment and vessels, which the syrian had cast away in their
haste. and the messeng returned, and told the king.

7:16 and the peopl went out, and spoil the tent of the syrians. so
a measur of fine flour wa sold for a shekel, and two measur of
barley for a shekel, accord to the word of the lord.

7:17 and the king appoint the lord on whose hand he lean to have
th charg of the gate: and the peopl trode upon him in the gate, and
h died, as the man of god had said, who spake when the king came down
to him.

7:18 and it came to pass as the man of god had spoken to the king,
saying, two measur of barley for a shekel, and a measur of fine
flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about thi time in the gate of
samaria: 7:19 and that lord answer the man of god, and said, now,
behold, if the lord should make window in heaven, might such a thing
be? and he said, behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt
not eat thereof.

7:20 and so it fell out unto him: for the peopl trode upon him in the
gate, and he died.

8:1 then spake elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restor to
life, saying, arise, and go thou and thine household, and sojourn
wheresoev thou canst sojourn: for the lord hath call for a famine;
and it shall also come upon the land seven years.

8:2 and the woman arose, and did after the say of the man of god:
and she went with her household, and sojourn in the land of the
philistin seven years.

8:3 and it came to pass at the seven years' end, that the woman
return out of the land of the philistines: and she went forth to cry
unto the king for her hous and for her land.

8:4 and the king talk with gehazi the servant of the man of god,
saying, tell me, I pray thee, all the great thing that elisha hath
done.

8:5 and it came to pass, as he wa tell the king how he had
restor a dead bodi to life, that, behold, the woman, whose son he
had restor to life, cri to the king for her hous and for her
land. and gehazi said, My lord, O king, thi is the woman, and thi is
her son, whom elisha restor to life.

8:6 and when the king ask the woman, she told him. So the king
appoint unto her a certain officer, saying, restor all that was
hers, and all the fruit of the field sinc the day that she left the
land, even until now.

8:7 and elisha came to damascus; and benhadad the king of syria was
sick; and it wa told him, saying, the man of god is come hither.

8:8 and the king said unto hazael, take a present in thine hand, and
go, meet the man of god, and enquir of the lord by him, saying, shall
i recov of thi disease?  8:9 So hazael went to meet him, and took a
pres with him, even of everi good thing of damascus, forti camels'
burden, and came and stood befor him, and said, thi son benhadad king
of syria hath sent me to thee, saying, shall I recov of this
disease?  8:10 and elisha said unto him, go, say unto him, thou mayest
certainli recover: howbeit the lord hath shew me that he shall
sur die.

8:11 and he settl hi counten stedfastly, until he wa ashamed:
and the man of god wept.

8:12 and hazael said, whi weepeth my lord? and he answered, becaus i
know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of israel: their
strong hold wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay
with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women
with child.

8:13 and hazael said, but what, is thi servant a dog, that he should
do thi great thing? and elisha answered, the lord hath shew me that
thou shalt be king over syria.

8:14 So he depart from elisha, and came to hi master; who said to
him, what said elisha to thee? and he answered, He told me that thou
shouldest sure recover.

8:15 and it came to pass on the morrow, that he took a thick cloth,
and dip it in water, and spread it on hi face, so that he died:
and hazael reign in hi stead.

8:16 and in the fifth year of joram the son of ahab king of israel,
jehoshaphat be then king of judah, jehoram the son of Je hoshaphat
k of judah began to reign.

8:17 thirti and two year old wa he when he began to reign; and he
reign eight year in jerusalem.

8:18 and he walk in the way of the king of israel, as did the house
of ahab: for the daughter of ahab wa hi wife: and he did evil in the
sight of the lord.

8:19 yet the lord would not destroy judah for david hi servant's
sake, as he promis him to give him alway a light, and to his
children.

8:20 In hi day edom revolt from under the hand of judah, and made
a king over themselves.

8:21 So joram went over to zair, and all the chariot with him: and he
ros by night, and smote the edomit which compass him about, and
th captain of the chariots: and the peopl fled into their tents.

8:22 yet edom revolt from under the hand of judah unto thi day.
then libnah revolt at the same time.

8:23 and the rest of the act of joram, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?  8:24
and joram slept with hi fathers, and wa buri with hi father in
th citi of david: and ahaziah hi son reign in hi stead.

8:25 In the twelfth year of joram the son of ahab king of israel did
ahaziah the son of jehoram king of judah begin to reign.

8:26 two and twenti year old wa ahaziah when he began to reign; and
h reign one year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name wa athaliah,
th daughter of omri king of israel.

8:27 and he walk in the way of the hous of ahab, and did evil in
th sight of the lord, as did the hous of ahab: for he wa the son in
law of the hous of ahab.

8:28 and he went with joram the son of ahab to the war against hazael
k of syria in ramothgilead; and the syrian wound joram.

8:29 and king joram went back to be heal in jezreel of the wounds
which the syrian had given him at ramah, when he fought against
hazael king of syria. and ahaziah the son of jehoram king of judah
w down to see joram the son of ahab in jezreel, becaus he was
sick.

9:1 and elisha the prophet call one of the children of the prophets,
and said unto him, gird up thi loins, and take thi box of oil in
thin hand, and go to ramothgilead: 9:2 and when thou comest thither,
look out there jehu the son of jehoshaphat the son of nimshi, and go
in, and make him aris up from among hi brethren, and carri him to an
inn chamber; 9:3 then take the box of oil, and pour it on hi head,
and say, thu saith the lord, I have anoint thee king over israel.
then open the door, and flee, and tarri not.

9:4 So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to
ramothgilead.

9:5 and when he came, behold, the captain of the host were sitting;
and he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. and jehu said, unto
which of all us? and he said, To thee, O captain.

9:6 and he arose, and went into the house; and he pour the oil on
hi head, and said unto him, thu saith the lord god of israel, I have
anoint thee king over the peopl of the lord, even over israel.

9:7 and thou shalt smite the hous of ahab thi master, that I may
aveng the blood of my servant the prophets, and the blood of all the
serv of the lord, at the hand of jezebel.

9:8 for the whole hous of ahab shall perish: and I will cut off from
ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and
left in israel: 9:9 and I will make the hous of ahab like the house
of jeroboam the son of nebat, and like the hous of baasha the son of
ahijah: 9:10 and the dog shall eat jezebel in the portion of jezreel,
and there shall be none to buri her. and he open the door, and fled.

9:11 then jehu came forth to the servant of hi lord: and one said
unto him, Is all well? wherefor came thi mad fellow to thee? and he
said unto them, Ye know the man, and hi communication.

9:12 and they said, It is false; tell us now. and he said, thu and
thu spake he to me, saying, thu saith the lord, I have anoint thee
k over israel.

9:13 then they hasted, and took everi man hi garment, and put it
und him on the top of the stairs, and blew with trumpets, saying,
jehu is king.

9:14 So jehu the son of jehoshaphat the son of nimshi conspired
against joram. (now joram had kept ramothgilead, he and all israel,
becaus of hazael king of syria.

9:15 but king joram wa return to be heal in jezreel of the wounds
which the syrian had given him, when he fought with hazael king of
syria.)  and jehu said, If it be your minds, then let none go forth
nor escap out of the citi to go to tell it in jezreel.

9:16 So jehu rode in a chariot, and went to jezreel; for joram lay
there.

and ahaziah king of judah wa come down to see joram.

9:17 and there stood a watchman on the tower in jezreel, and he spied
th compani of jehu as he came, and said, I see a company. and joram
said, take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, Is it
peace?  9:18 So there went one on horseback to meet him, and said,
thu saith the king, Is it peace? and jehu said, what hast thou to do
with peace? turn thee behind me. and the watchman told, saying, the
messeng came to them, but he cometh not again.

9:19 then he sent out a second on horseback, which came to them, and
said, thu saith the king, Is it peace? and jehu answered, what hast
thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.

9:20 and the watchman told, saying, He came even unto them, and cometh
not again: and the drive is like the drive of jehu the son of
nimshi; for he driveth furiously.

9:21 and joram said, make ready. and hi chariot wa made ready. and
joram king of israel and ahaziah king of judah went out, each in his
chariot, and they went out against jehu, and met him in the portion of
naboth the jezreelite.

9:22 and it came to pass, when joram saw jehu, that he said, Is it
peace, jehu? and he answered, what peace, so long as the whoredom of
thi mother jezebel and her witchcraft are so many?  9:23 and joram
turn hi hands, and fled, and said to ahaziah, there is treachery, o
ahaziah.

9:24 and jehu drew a bow with hi full strength, and smote jehoram
between hi arms, and the arrow went out at hi heart, and he sunk
down in hi chariot.

9:25 then said jehu to bidkar hi captain, take up, and cast him in
th portion of the field of naboth the jezreelite: for rememb how
that, when I and thou rode togeth after ahab hi father, the lord
laid thi burden upon him; 9:26 sure I have seen yesterday the blood
of naboth, and the blood of hi sons, saith the lord; and I will
requit thee in thi plat, saith the lord. now therefor take and cast
him into the plat of ground, accord to the word of the lord.

9:27 but when ahaziah the king of judah saw this, he fled by the way
of the garden house. and jehu follow after him, and said, smite him
also in the chariot. and they did so at the go up to gur, which is
bi ibleam.

and he fled to megiddo, and die there.

9:28 and hi servant carri him in a chariot to jerusalem, and
buri him in hi sepulchr with hi father in the citi of david.

9:29 and in the eleventh year of joram the son of ahab began ahaziah
to reign over judah.

9:30 and when jehu wa come to jezreel, jezebel heard of it; and she
paint her face, and tire her head, and look out at a window.

9:31 and as jehu enter in at the gate, she said, had zimri peace,
who slew hi master?  9:32 and he lift up hi face to the window,
and said, who is on my side?  who? and there look out to him two or
thre eunuchs.

9:33 and he said, throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of
her blood wa sprinkl on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode
h under foot.

9:34 and when he wa come in, he did eat and drink, and said, go, see
now thi curs woman, and buri her: for she is a king' daughter.

9:35 and they went to buri her: but they found no more of her than the
skull, and the feet, and the palm of her hands.

9:36 wherefor they came again, and told him. and he said, thi is the
word of the lord, which he spake by hi servant elijah the tishbite,
saying, In the portion of jezreel shall dog eat the flesh of jezebel:
9:37 and the carcas of jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the
field in the portion of jezreel; so that they shall not say, thi is
jezebel.

10:1 and ahab had seventi son in samaria. and jehu wrote letters, and
sent to samaria, unto the ruler of jezreel, to the elders, and to
them that brought up ahab' children, saying, 10:2 now as soon as this
lett cometh to you, see your master' son are with you, and
ther are with you chariot and horses, a fenc citi also, and
armour; 10:3 look even out the best and meetest of your master' sons,
and set him on hi father' throne, and fight for your master' house.

10:4 but they were exceedingli afraid, and said, behold, two kings
stood not befor him: how then shall we stand?  10:5 and he that was
ov the house, and he that wa over the city, the elder also, and
th bringer up of the children, sent to jehu, saying, We are thy
servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not make any
king: do thou that which is good in thine eyes.

10:6 then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be
mine, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the head of the
men your master' sons, and come to me to jezreel by to morrow this
time. now the king' sons, be seventi persons, were with the great
men of the city, which brought them up.

10:7 and it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took
th king' sons, and slew seventi persons, and put their head in
baskets, and sent him them to jezreel.

10:8 and there came a messenger, and told him, saying, they have
brought the head of the king' sons. and he said, lay ye them in two
heap at the enter in of the gate until the morning.

10:9 and it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood,
and said to all the people, Ye be righteous: behold, I conspired
against my master, and slew him: but who slew all these?  10:10 know
now that there shall fall unto the earth noth of the word of the
lord, which the lord spake concern the hous of ahab: for the lord
hath done that which he spake by hi servant elijah.

10:11 So jehu slew all that remain of the hous of ahab in jezreel,
and all hi great men, and hi kinsfolks, and hi priests, until he
left him none remaining.

10:12 and he aros and departed, and came to samaria. and as he wa at
th shear hous in the way, 10:13 jehu met with the brethren of
ahaziah king of judah, and said, who are ye? and they answered, We are
th brethren of ahaziah; and we go down to salut the children of the
k and the children of the queen.

10:14 and he said, take them alive. and they took them alive, and slew
them at the pit of the shear house, even two and forti men; neither
left he ani of them.

10:15 and when he wa depart thence, he light on jehonadab the son
of rechab come to meet him: and he salut him, and said to him, is
thin heart right, as my heart is with thi heart? and jehonadab
answered, It is. If it be, give me thine hand. and he gave him his
hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.

10:16 and he said, come with me, and see my zeal for the lord. So they
mad him ride in hi chariot.

10:17 and when he came to samaria, he slew all that remain unto ahab
in samaria, till he had destroy him, accord to the say of the
lord, which he spake to elijah.

10:18 and jehu gather all the peopl together, and said unto them,
ahab serv baal a little; but jehu shall serv him much.

10:19 now therefor call unto me all the prophet of baal, all his
servants, and all hi priests; let none be wanting: for I have a great
sacrific to do to baal; whosoev shall be wanting, he shall not
live. but jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy
th worshipp of baal.

10:20 and jehu said, proclaim a solemn assembl for baal. and they
proclaim it.

10:21 and jehu sent through all israel: and all the worshipp of
baal came, so that there wa not a man left that came not. and they
cam into the hous of baal; and the hous of baal wa full from one
end to another.

10:22 and he said unto him that wa over the vestry, bring forth
vest for all the worshipp of baal. and he brought them forth
vestments.

10:23 and jehu went, and jehonadab the son of rechab, into the house
of baal, and said unto the worshipp of baal, search, and look that
ther be here with you none of the servant of the lord, but the
worshipp of baal only.

10:24 and when they went in to offer sacrific and burnt offerings,
jehu appoint fourscor men without, and said, If ani of the men whom
i have brought into your hand escape, he that letteth him go, his
lif shall be for the life of him.

10:25 and it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering
th burnt offering, that jehu said to the guard and to the captains,
go in, and slay them; let none come forth. and they smote them with
th edg of the sword; and the guard and the captain cast them out,
and went to the citi of the hous of baal.

10:26 and they brought forth the imag out of the hous of baal, and
burn them.

10:27 and they brake down the imag of baal, and brake down the house
of baal, and made it a draught hous unto thi day.

10:28 thu jehu destroy baal out of israel.

10:29 howbeit from the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel to sin, jehu depart not from after them, to wit, the golden
calv that were in bethel, and that were in dan.

10:30 and the lord said unto jehu, becaus thou hast done well in
execut that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the
hous of ahab accord to all that wa in mine heart, thi children of
th fourth gener shall sit on the throne of israel.

10:31 but jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the lord god of
israel with all hi heart: for he depart not from the sin of
jeroboam, which made israel to sin.

10:32 In those day the lord began to cut israel short: and hazael
smot them in all the coast of israel; 10:33 from jordan eastward,
al the land of gilead, the gadites, and the reubenites, and the
manassites, from aroer, which is by the river arnon, even gilead and
bashan.

10:34 now the rest of the act of jehu, and all that he did, and all
hi might, are they not written in the book of the chronicl of the
k of israel?  10:35 and jehu slept with hi fathers: and they
buri him in samaria. and jehoahaz hi son reign in hi stead.

10:36 and the time that jehu reign over israel in samaria wa twenty
and eight years.

11:1 and when athaliah the mother of ahaziah saw that her son was
dead, she aros and destroy all the seed royal.

11:2 but jehosheba, the daughter of king joram, sister of ahaziah,
took joash the son of ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's
son which were slain; and they hid him, even him and hi nurse, in
th bedchamb from athaliah, so that he wa not slain.

11:3 and he wa with her hid in the hous of the lord six years. and
athaliah did reign over the land.

11:4 and the seventh year jehoiada sent and fetch the ruler over
hundreds, with the captain and the guard, and brought them to him
into the hous of the lord, and made a coven with them, and took an
oath of them in the hous of the lord, and shew them the king' son.

11:5 and he command them, saying, thi is the thing that ye shall
do; A third part of you that enter in on the sabbath shall even be
keep of the watch of the king' house; 11:6 and a third part shall
b at the gate of sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard:
so shall ye keep the watch of the house, that it be not broken down.

11:7 and two part of all you that go forth on the sabbath, even they
shal keep the watch of the hous of the lord about the king.

11:8 and ye shall compass the king round about, everi man with his
weapon in hi hand: and he that cometh within the ranges, let him be
slain: and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as he cometh in.

11:9 and the captain over the hundr did accord to all things
that jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took everi man hi men
that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that should go out on
th sabbath, and came to jehoiada the priest.

11:10 and to the captain over hundr did the priest give king
david' spear and shields, that were in the templ of the lord.

11:11 and the guard stood, everi man with hi weapon in hi hand,
round about the king, from the right corner of the templ to the left
corn of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.

11:12 and he brought forth the king' son, and put the crown upon him,
and gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anoint him;
and they clap their hands, and said, god save the king.

11:13 and when athaliah heard the nois of the guard and of the
people, she came to the peopl into the templ of the lord.

11:14 and when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the
mann was, and the princ and the trumpet by the king, and all
th peopl of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets: and athaliah
r her clothes, and cried, treason, treason.

11:15 but jehoiada the priest command the captain of the hundreds,
th offic of the host, and said unto them, have her forth without
th ranges: and him that followeth her kill with the sword. for the
priest had said, let her not be slain in the hous of the lord.

11:16 and they laid hand on her; and she went by the way by the which
th hors came into the king' house: and there wa she slain.

11:17 and jehoiada made a coven between the lord and the king and
th people, that they should be the lord' people; between the king
also and the people.

11:18 and all the peopl of the land went into the hous of baal, and
brak it down; hi altar and hi imag brake they in pieces
thoroughly, and slew mattan the priest of baal befor the altars. and
th priest appoint offic over the hous of the lord.

11:19 and he took the ruler over hundreds, and the captains, and the
guard, and all the peopl of the land; and they brought down the king
from the hous of the lord, and came by the way of the gate of the
guard to the king' house. and he sat on the throne of the kings.

11:20 and all the peopl of the land rejoiced, and the citi wa in
quiet: and they slew athaliah with the sword besid the king' house.

11:21 seven year old wa jehoash when he began to reign.

12:1 In the seventh year of jehu jehoash began to reign; and forty
year reign he in jerusalem. and hi mother' name wa zibiah of
beersheba.

12:2 and jehoash did that which wa right in the sight of the lord all
hi day wherein jehoiada the priest instruct him.

12:3 but the high place were not taken away: the peopl still
sacrif and burnt incens in the high places.

12:4 and jehoash said to the priests, all the money of the dedicated
th that is brought into the hous of the lord, even the money of
everi one that passeth the account, the money that everi man is set
at, and all the money that cometh into ani man' heart to bring into
th hous of the lord, 12:5 let the priest take it to them, everi man
of hi acquaintance: and let them repair the breach of the house,
wheresoev ani breach shall be found.

12:6 but it wa so, that in the three and twentieth year of king
jehoash the priest had not repair the breach of the house.

12:7 then king jehoash call for jehoiada the priest, and the other
priests, and said unto them, whi repair ye not the breach of the
house? now therefor receiv no more money of your acquaintance, but
deliv it for the breach of the house.

12:8 and the priest consent to receiv no more money of the people,
neith to repair the breach of the house.

12:9 but jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bore a hole in the lid
of it, and set it besid the altar, on the right side as one cometh
into the hous of the lord: and the priest that kept the door put
therein all the money that wa brought into the hous of the lord.

12:10 and it wa so, when they saw that there wa much money in the
chest, that the king' scribe and the high priest came up, and they
put up in bags, and told the money that wa found in the hous of the
lord.

12:11 and they gave the money, be told, into the hand of them that
did the work, that had the oversight of the hous of the lord: and
they laid it out to the carpent and builders, that wrought upon the
hous of the lord, 12:12 and to masons, and hewer of stone, and to
buy timber and hew stone to repair the breach of the hous of the
lord, and for all that wa laid out for the hous to repair it.

12:13 howbeit there were not made for the hous of the lord bowl of
silver, snuffers, basons, trumpets, ani vessel of gold, or vessel of
silver, of the money that wa brought into the hous of the lord:
12:14 but they gave that to the workmen, and repair therewith the
hous of the lord.

12:15 moreov they reckon not with the men, into whose hand they
deliv the money to be bestow on workmen: for they dealt
faithfully.

12:16 the trespass money and sin money wa not brought into the house
of the lord: it wa the priests'.

12:17 then hazael king of syria went up, and fought against gath, and
took it: and hazael set hi face to go up to jerusalem.

12:18 and jehoash king of judah took all the hallow thing that
jehoshaphat, and jehoram, and ahaziah, hi fathers, king of judah,
had dedicated, and hi own hallow things, and all the gold that was
found in the treasur of the hous of the lord, and in the king's
house, and sent it to hazael king of syria: and he went away from
jerusalem.

12:19 and the rest of the act of joash, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?
12:20 and hi servant arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew joash in
th hous of millo, which goeth down to silla.

12:21 for jozachar the son of shimeath, and jehozabad the son of
shomer, hi servants, smote him, and he died; and they buri him with
hi father in the citi of david: and amaziah hi son reign in his
stead.

13:1 In the three and twentieth year of joash the son of ahaziah king
of judah jehoahaz the son of jehu began to reign over israel in
samaria, and reign seventeen years.

13:2 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord, and
follow the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat, which made israel to
sin; he depart not therefrom.

13:3 and the anger of the lord wa kindl against israel, and he
deliv them into the hand of hazael king of syria, and into the
hand of benhadad the son of hazael, all their days.

13:4 and jehoahaz besought the lord, and the lord hearken unto him:
for he saw the oppress of israel, becaus the king of syria
oppress them.

13:5 (and the lord gave israel a saviour, so that they went out from
und the hand of the syrians: and the children of israel dwelt in
their tents, as beforetime.

13:6 nevertheless they depart not from the sin of the hous of
jeroboam, who made israel sin, but walk therein: and there remained
th grove also in samaria.)  13:7 neither did he leav of the people
to jehoahaz but fifti horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand
footmen; for the king of syria had destroy them, and had made them
lik the dust by threshing.

13:8 now the rest of the act of jehoahaz, and all that he did, and
hi might, are they not written in the book of the chronicl of the
k of israel?  13:9 and jehoahaz slept with hi fathers; and they
buri him in samaria: and joash hi son reign in hi stead.

13:10 In the thirti and seventh year of joash king of judah began
jehoash the son of jehoahaz to reign over israel in samaria, and
reign sixteen years.

13:11 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord; he
depart not from all the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel sin: but he walk therein.

13:12 and the rest of the act of joash, and all that he did, and his
might wherewith he fought against amaziah king of judah, are they not
written in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel?  13:13
and joash slept with hi fathers; and jeroboam sat upon hi throne:
and joash wa buri in samaria with the king of israel.

13:14 now elisha wa fallen sick of hi sick whereof he died. and
joash the king of israel came down unto him, and wept over hi face,
and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of israel, and the
horsemen thereof.

13:15 and elisha said unto him, take bow and arrows. and he took unto
him bow and arrows.

13:16 and he said to the king of israel, put thine hand upon the bow.
and he put hi hand upon it: and elisha put hi hand upon the king's
hands.

13:17 and he said, open the window eastward. and he open it. then
elisha said, shoot. and he shot. and he said, the arrow of the lord's
deliverance, and the arrow of deliver from syria: for thou shalt
smit the syrian in aphek, till thou have consum them.

13:18 and he said, take the arrows. and he took them. and he said unto
th king of israel, smite upon the ground. and he smote thrice, and
stayed.

13:19 and the man of god wa wroth with him, and said, thou shouldest
hav smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten syria till
thou hadst consum it: wherea now thou shalt smite syria but thrice.

13:20 and elisha died, and they buri him. and the band of the
moabit invad the land at the come in of the year.

13:21 and it came to pass, as they were buri a man, that, behold,
they spi a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchr of
elisha: and when the man wa let down, and touch the bone of
elisha, he revived, and stood up on hi feet.

13:22 but hazael king of syria oppress israel all the day of
jehoahaz.

13:23 and the lord wa graciou unto them, and had compass on them,
and had respect unto them, becaus of hi coven with abraham,
isaac, and jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them
from hi presenc as yet.

13:24 So hazael king of syria died; and benhadad hi son reign in
hi stead.

13:25 and jehoash the son of jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
benhadad the son of hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the
hand of jehoahaz hi father by war. three time did joash beat him,
and recov the citi of israel.

14:1 In the second year of joash son of jehoahaz king of israel
reign amaziah the son of joash king of judah.

14:2 He wa twenti and five year old when he began to reign, and
reign twenti and nine year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
jehoaddan of jerusalem.

14:3 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord, yet not
lik david hi father: he did accord to all thing as joash his
fath did.

14:4 howbeit the high place were not taken away: as yet the people
did sacrific and burnt incens on the high places.

14:5 and it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom wa confirm in his
hand, that he slew hi servant which had slain the king hi father.

14:6 but the children of the murder he slew not: accord unto
that which is written in the book of the law of moses, wherein the
lord commanded, saying, the father shall not be put to death for the
children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every
man shall be put to death for hi own sin.

14:7 He slew of edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took
selah by war, and call the name of it joktheel unto thi day.

14:8 then amaziah sent messeng to jehoash, the son of jehoahaz son
of jehu, king of israel, saying, come, let us look one anoth in the
face.

14:9 and jehoash the king of israel sent to amaziah king of judah,
saying, the thistl that wa in lebanon sent to the cedar that wa in
lebanon, saying, give thi daughter to my son to wife: and there passed
bi a wild beast that wa in lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

14:10 thou hast inde smitten edom, and thine heart hath lift thee
up: glori of this, and tarri at home: for whi shouldest thou meddl to
thi hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and judah with thee?
14:11 but amaziah would not hear. therefor jehoash king of israel
w up; and he and amaziah king of judah look one anoth in the
fac at bethshemesh, which belongeth to judah.

14:12 and judah wa put to the wors befor israel; and they fled
everi man to their tents.

14:13 and jehoash king of israel took amaziah king of judah, the son
of jehoash the son of ahaziah, at bethshemesh, and came to jerusalem,
and brake down the wall of jerusalem from the gate of ephraim unto the
corn gate, four hundr cubits.

14:14 and he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessel that
wer found in the hous of the lord, and in the treasur of the
king' house, and hostages, and return to samaria.

14:15 now the rest of the act of jehoash which he did, and hi might,
and how he fought with amaziah king of judah, are they not written in
th book of the chronicl of the king of israel?  14:16 and jehoash
slept with hi fathers, and wa buri in samaria with the king of
israel; and jeroboam hi son reign in hi stead.

14:17 and amaziah the son of joash king of judah live after the death
of jehoash son of jehoahaz king of israel fifteen years.

14:18 and the rest of the act of amaziah, are they not written in the
book of the chronicl of the king of judah?  14:19 now they made a
conspiraci against him in jerusalem: and he fled to lachish; but they
sent after him to lachish, and slew him there.

14:20 and they brought him on horses: and he wa buri at jerusalem
with hi father in the citi of david.

14:21 and all the peopl of judah took azariah, which wa sixteen
year old, and made him king instead of hi father amaziah.

14:22 He built elath, and restor it to judah, after that the king
slept with hi fathers.

14:23 In the fifteenth year of amaziah the son of joash king of judah
jeroboam the son of joash king of israel began to reign in samaria,
and reign forti and one years.

14:24 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord: he
depart not from all the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel to sin.

14:25 He restor the coast of israel from the enter of hamath unto
th sea of the plain, accord to the word of the lord god of israel,
which he spake by the hand of hi servant jonah, the son of amittai,
th prophet, which wa of gathhepher.

14:26 for the lord saw the afflict of israel, that it wa very
bitter: for there wa not ani shut up, nor ani left, nor ani helper
for israel.

14:27 and the lord said not that he would blot out the name of israel
from under heaven: but he save them by the hand of jeroboam the son
of joash.

14:28 now the rest of the act of jeroboam, and all that he did, and
hi might, how he warred, and how he recov damascus, and hamath,
which belong to judah, for israel, are they not written in the book
of the chronicl of the king of israel?  14:29 and jeroboam slept
with hi fathers, even with the king of israel; and zachariah hi son
reign in hi stead.

15:1 In the twenti and seventh year of jeroboam king of israel began
azariah son of amaziah king of judah to reign.

15:2 sixteen year old wa he when he began to reign, and he reigned
two and fifti year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name wa jecholiah
of jerusalem.

15:3 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that hi father amaziah had done; 15:4 save that the
high place were not removed: the peopl sacrif and burnt incense
stil on the high places.

15:5 and the lord smote the king, so that he wa a leper unto the day
of hi death, and dwelt in a sever house. and jotham the king' son
wa over the house, judg the peopl of the land.

15:6 and the rest of the act of azariah, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?
15:7 So azariah slept with hi fathers; and they buri him with his
fath in the citi of david: and jotham hi son reign in hi stead.

15:8 In the thirti and eighth year of azariah king of judah did
zachariah the son of jeroboam reign over israel in samaria six months.

15:9 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord, as his
fath had done: he depart not from the sin of jeroboam the son of
nebat, who made israel to sin.

15:10 and shallum the son of jabesh conspir against him, and smote
him befor the people, and slew him, and reign in hi stead.

15:11 and the rest of the act of zachariah, behold, they are written
in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel.

15:12 thi wa the word of the lord which he spake unto jehu, saying,
thi son shall sit on the throne of israel unto the fourth generation.
and so it came to pass.

15:13 shallum the son of jabesh began to reign in the nine and
thirtieth year of uzziah king of judah; and he reign a full month in
samaria.

15:14 for menahem the son of gadi went up from tirzah, and came to
samaria, and smote shallum the son of jabesh in samaria, and slew him,
and reign in hi stead.

15:15 and the rest of the act of shallum, and hi conspiraci which he
made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicl of the
k of israel.

15:16 then menahem smote tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the
coast thereof from tirzah: becaus they open not to him, therefore
h smote it; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped
up.

15:17 In the nine and thirtieth year of azariah king of judah began
menahem the son of gadi to reign over israel, and reign ten year in
samaria.

15:18 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord: he
depart not all hi day from the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat,
who made israel to sin.

15:19 and pul the king of assyria came against the land: and menahem
gav pul a thousand talent of silver, that hi hand might be with him
to confirm the kingdom in hi hand.

15:20 and menahem exact the money of israel, even of all the mighty
men of wealth, of each man fifti shekel of silver, to give to the
k of assyria. So the king of assyria turn back, and stay not
ther in the land.

15:21 and the rest of the act of menahem, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel?
15:22 and menahem slept with hi fathers; and pekahiah hi son reigned
in hi stead.

15:23 In the fiftieth year of azariah king of judah pekahiah the son
of menahem began to reign over israel in samaria, and reign two
years.

15:24 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord: he
depart not from the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel to sin.

15:25 but pekah the son of remaliah, a captain of his, conspired
against him, and smote him in samaria, in the palac of the king's
house, with argob and arieh, and with him fifti men of the gileadites:
and he kill him, and reign in hi room.

15:26 and the rest of the act of pekahiah, and all that he did,
behold, they are written in the book of the chronicl of the king of
israel.

15:27 In the two and fiftieth year of azariah king of judah pekah the
son of remaliah began to reign over israel in samaria, and reigned
twenti years.

15:28 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord: he
depart not from the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat, who made
israel to sin.

15:29 In the day of pekah king of israel came tiglathpiles king of
assyria, and took ijon, and abelbethmaachah, and janoah, and kedesh,
and hazor, and gilead, and galilee, all the land of naphtali, and
carri them captiv to assyria.

15:30 and hoshea the son of elah made a conspiraci against pekah the
son of remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reign in his
stead, in the twentieth year of jotham the son of uzziah.

15:31 and the rest of the act of pekah, and all that he did, behold,
they are written in the book of the chronicl of the king of israel.

15:32 In the second year of pekah the son of remaliah king of israel
began jotham the son of uzziah king of judah to reign.

15:33 five and twenti year old wa he when he began to reign, and he
reign sixteen year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name wa jerusha,
th daughter of zadok.

15:34 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord: he did
accord to all that hi father uzziah had done.

15:35 howbeit the high place were not removed: the peopl sacrificed
and burn incens still in the high places. He built the higher gate
of the hous of the lord.

15:36 now the rest of the act of jotham, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?
15:37 In those day the lord began to send against judah rezin the
k of syria, and pekah the son of remaliah.

15:38 and jotham slept with hi fathers, and wa buri with his
fath in the citi of david hi father: and ahaz hi son reign in
hi stead.

16:1 In the seventeenth year of pekah the son of remaliah ahaz the son
of jotham king of judah began to reign.

16:2 twenti year old wa ahaz when he began to reign, and reigned
sixteen year in jerusalem, and did not that which wa right in the
sight of the lord hi god, like david hi father.

16:3 but he walk in the way of the king of israel, yea, and made
hi son to pass through the fire, accord to the abomin of the
heathen, whom the lord cast out from befor the children of israel.

16:4 and he sacrif and burnt incens in the high places, and on
th hills, and under everi green tree.

16:5 then rezin king of syria and pekah son of remaliah king of israel
cam up to jerusalem to war: and they besieg ahaz, but could not
overcom him.

16:6 At that time rezin king of syria recov elath to syria, and
drav the jew from elath: and the syrian came to elath, and dwelt
ther unto thi day.

16:7 So ahaz sent messeng to tiglathpiles king of assyria,
saying, I am thi servant and thi son: come up, and save me out of the
hand of the king of syria, and out of the hand of the king of israel,
which rise up against me.

16:8 and ahaz took the silver and gold that wa found in the hous of
th lord, and in the treasur of the king' house, and sent it for a
pres to the king of assyria.

16:9 and the king of assyria hearken unto him: for the king of
assyria went up against damascus, and took it, and carri the people
of it captiv to kir, and slew rezin.

16:10 and king ahaz went to damascu to meet tiglathpiles king of
assyria, and saw an altar that wa at damascus: and king ahaz sent to
urijah the priest the fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it,
accord to all the workmanship thereof.

16:11 and urijah the priest built an altar accord to all that king
ahaz had sent from damascus: so urijah the priest made it against king
ahaz came from damascus.

16:12 and when the king wa come from damascus, the king saw the
altar: and the king approach to the altar, and offer thereon.

16:13 and he burnt hi burnt offer and hi meat offering, and
pour hi drink offering, and sprinkl the blood of hi peace
offerings, upon the altar.

16:14 and he brought also the brasen altar, which wa befor the lord,
from the forefront of the house, from between the altar and the house
of the lord, and put it on the north side of the altar.

16:15 and king ahaz command urijah the priest, saying, upon the
great altar burn the morn burnt offering, and the even meat
offering, and the king' burnt sacrifice, and hi meat offering, with
th burnt offer of all the peopl of the land, and their meat
offering, and their drink offerings; and sprinkl upon it all the
blood of the burnt offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice: and
th brasen altar shall be for me to enquir by.

16:16 thu did urijah the priest, accord to all that king ahaz
commanded.

16:17 and king ahaz cut off the border of the bases, and remov the
lav from off them; and took down the sea from off the brasen oxen
that were under it, and put it upon the pavement of stones.

16:18 and the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the house,
and the king' entri without, turn he from the hous of the lord for
th king of assyria.

16:19 now the rest of the act of ahaz which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?  16:20
and ahaz slept with hi fathers, and wa buri with hi father in
th citi of david: and hezekiah hi son reign in hi stead.

17:1 In the twelfth year of ahaz king of judah began hoshea the son of
elah to reign in samaria over israel nine years.

17:2 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord, but not
a the king of israel that were befor him.

17:3 against him came up shalmanes king of assyria; and hoshea
becam hi servant, and gave him presents.

17:4 and the king of assyria found conspiraci in hoshea: for he had
sent messeng to So king of egypt, and brought no present to the
k of assyria, as he had done year by year: therefor the king of
assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.

17:5 then the king of assyria came up throughout all the land, and
went up to samaria, and besieg it three years.

17:6 In the ninth year of hoshea the king of assyria took samaria, and
carri israel away into assyria, and place them in halah and in
habor by the river of gozan, and in the citi of the medes.

17:7 for so it was, that the children of israel had sin against the
lord their god, which had brought them up out of the land of egypt,
from under the hand of pharaoh king of egypt, and had fear other
gods, 17:8 and walk in the statut of the heathen, whom the lord
cast out from befor the children of israel, and of the king of
israel, which they had made.

17:9 and the children of israel did secretli those thing that were
not right against the lord their god, and they built them high places
in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced
city.

17:10 and they set them up imag and grove in everi high hill, and
und everi green tree: 17:11 and there they burnt incens in all the
high places, as did the heathen whom the lord carri away before
them; and wrought wick thing to provok the lord to anger: 17:12
for they serv idols, whereof the lord had said unto them, Ye shall
not do thi thing.

17:13 yet the lord testifi against israel, and against judah, by all
th prophets, and by all the seers, saying, turn ye from your evil
ways, and keep my command and my statutes, accord to all the
law which I command your fathers, and which I sent to you by my
serv the prophets.

17:14 notwithstand they would not hear, but harden their necks,
lik to the neck of their fathers, that did not believ in the lord
their god.

17:15 and they reject hi statutes, and hi coven that he made
with their fathers, and hi testimoni which he testifi against
them; and they follow vanity, and becam vain, and went after the
heathen that were round about them, concern whom the lord had
charg them, that they should not do like them.

17:16 and they left all the command of the lord their god, and
mad them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and
worship all the host of heaven, and serv baal.

17:17 and they caus their son and their daughter to pass through
th fire, and use divin and enchantments, and sold themselv to
do evil in the sight of the lord, to provok him to anger.

17:18 therefor the lord wa veri angri with israel, and remov them
out of hi sight: there wa none left but the tribe of judah only.

17:19 also judah kept not the command of the lord their god, but
walk in the statut of israel which they made.

17:20 and the lord reject all the seed of israel, and afflicted
them, and deliv them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast
them out of hi sight.

17:21 for he rent israel from the hous of david; and they made
jeroboam the son of nebat king: and jeroboam drave israel from
follow the lord, and made them sin a great sin.

17:22 for the children of israel walk in all the sin of jeroboam
which he did; they depart not from them; 17:23 until the lord
remov israel out of hi sight, as he had said by all hi servants
th prophets. So wa israel carri away out of their own land to
assyria unto thi day.

17:24 and the king of assyria brought men from babylon, and from
cuthah, and from ava, and from hamath, and from sepharvaim, and placed
them in the citi of samaria instead of the children of israel: and
they possess samaria, and dwelt in the citi thereof.

17:25 and so it wa at the begin of their dwell there, that
they fear not the lord: therefor the lord sent lion among them,
which slew some of them.

17:26 wherefor they spake to the king of assyria, saying, the nations
which thou hast removed, and place in the citi of samaria, know not
th manner of the god of the land: therefor he hath sent lion among
them, and, behold, they slay them, becaus they know not the manner of
th god of the land.

17:27 then the king of assyria commanded, saying, carri thither one of
th priest whom ye brought from thence; and let them go and dwell
there, and let him teach them the manner of the god of the land.

17:28 then one of the priest whom they had carri away from samaria
cam and dwelt in bethel, and taught them how they should fear the
lord.

17:29 howbeit everi nation made god of their own, and put them in the
hous of the high place which the samaritan had made, everi nation
in their citi wherein they dwelt.

17:30 and the men of babylon made succothbenoth, and the men of cuth
mad nergal, and the men of hamath made ashima, 17:31 and the avites
mad nibhaz and tartak, and the sepharvit burnt their children in
fir to adrammelech and anammelech, the god of sepharvaim.

17:32 So they fear the lord, and made unto themselv of the lowest
of them priest of the high places, which sacrif for them in the
hous of the high places.

17:33 they fear the lord, and serv their own gods, after the
mann of the nation whom they carri away from thence.

17:34 unto thi day they do after the former manners: they fear not
th lord, neither do they after their statutes, or after their
ordinances, or after the law and command which the lord commanded
th children of jacob, whom he name israel; 17:35 with whom the lord
had made a covenant, and charg them, saying, Ye shall not fear other
gods, nor bow yourselv to them, nor serv them, nor sacrific to
them: 17:36 but the lord, who brought you up out of the land of egypt
with great power and a stretch out arm, him shall ye fear, and him
shal ye worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice.

17:37 and the statutes, and the ordinances, and the law, and the
commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observ to do for
evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods.

17:38 and the coven that I have made with you ye shall not forget;
neith shall ye fear other gods.

17:39 but the lord your god ye shall fear; and he shall deliv you
out of the hand of all your enemies.

17:40 howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former
manner.

17:41 So these nation fear the lord, and serv their graven
images, both their children, and their children' children: as did
their fathers, so do they unto thi day.

18:1 now it came to pass in the third year of hoshea son of elah king
of israel, that hezekiah the son of ahaz king of judah began to reign.

18:2 twenti and five year old wa he when he began to reign; and he
reign twenti and nine year in jerusalem. hi mother' name also was
abi, the daughter of zachariah.

18:3 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that david hi father did.

18:4 He remov the high places, and brake the images, and cut down
th groves, and brake in piec the brasen serpent that mose had
made: for unto those day the children of israel did burn incens to
it: and he call it nehushtan.

18:5 He trust in the lord god of israel; so that after him wa none
lik him among all the king of judah, nor ani that were befor him.

18:6 for he clave to the lord, and depart not from follow him,
but kept hi commandments, which the lord command moses.

18:7 and the lord wa with him; and he prosper whithersoev he went
forth: and he rebel against the king of assyria, and serv him
not.

18:8 He smote the philistines, even unto gaza, and the borders
thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenc city.

18:9 and it came to pass in the fourth year of king hezekiah, which
wa the seventh year of hoshea son of elah king of israel, that
shalmanes king of assyria came up against samaria, and besieg it.

18:10 and at the end of three year they took it: even in the sixth
year of hezekiah, that is in the ninth year of hoshea king of israel,
samaria wa taken.

18:11 and the king of assyria did carri away israel unto assyria, and
put them in halah and in habor by the river of gozan, and in the
citi of the medes: 18:12 becaus they obey not the voic of the
lord their god, but transgress hi covenant, and all that mose the
serv of the lord commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.

18:13 now in the fourteenth year of king hezekiah did sennacherib king
of assyria come up against all the fenc citi of judah, and took
them.

18:14 and hezekiah king of judah sent to the king of assyria to
lachish, saying, I have offended; return from me: that which thou
puttest on me will I bear. and the king of assyria appoint unto
hezekiah king of judah three hundr talent of silver and thirty
tal of gold.

18:15 and hezekiah gave him all the silver that wa found in the house
of the lord, and in the treasur of the king' house.

18:16 At that time did hezekiah cut off the gold from the door of the
templ of the lord, and from the pillar which hezekiah king of judah
had overlaid, and gave it to the king of assyria.

18:17 and the king of assyria sent tartan and rabsari and rabshakeh
from lachish to king hezekiah with a great host against jerusalem. and
they went up and came to jerusalem. and when they were come up, they
cam and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the
highway of the fuller' field.

18:18 and when they had call to the king, there came out to them
eliakim the son of hilkiah, which wa over the household, and shebna
th scribe, and joah the son of asaph the recorder.

18:19 and rabshakeh said unto them, speak ye now to hezekiah, thus
saith the great king, the king of assyria, what confid is this
wherein thou trustest?  18:20 thou sayest, (but they are but vain
words,) I have counsel and strength for the war. now on whom dost thou
trust, that thou rebellest against me?  18:21 now, behold, thou
trustest upon the staff of thi bruis reed, even upon egypt, on
which if a man lean, it will go into hi hand, and pierc it: so is
pharaoh king of egypt unto all that trust on him.

18:22 but if ye say unto me, We trust in the lord our god: is not that
he, whose high place and whose altar hezekiah hath taken away, and
hath said to judah and jerusalem, Ye shall worship befor thi altar
in jerusalem?  18:23 now therefore, I pray thee, give pledg to my
lord the king of assyria, and I will deliv thee two thousand horses,
if thou be abl on thi part to set rider upon them.

18:24 how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the
least of my master' servants, and put thi trust on egypt for chariots
and for horsemen?  18:25 Am I now come up without the lord against
thi place to destroy it?  the lord said to me, Go up against this
land, and destroy it.

18:26 then said eliakim the son of hilkiah, and shebna, and joah, unto
rabshakeh, speak, I pray thee, to thi servant in the syrian language;
for we understand it: and talk not with us in the jews' languag in
th ear of the peopl that are on the wall.

18:27 but rabshakeh said unto them, hath my master sent me to thy
master, and to thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the
men which sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink
their own piss with you?  18:28 then rabshakeh stood and cri with a
loud voic in the jews' language, and spake, saying, hear the word of
th great king, the king of assyria: 18:29 thu saith the king, let
not hezekiah deceiv you: for he shall not be abl to deliv you out
of hi hand: 18:30 neither let hezekiah make you trust in the lord,
saying, the lord will sure deliv us, and thi citi shall not be
deliv into the hand of the king of assyria.

18:31 hearken not to hezekiah: for thu saith the king of assyria,
mak an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me, and then
eat ye everi man of hi own vine, and everi one of hi fig tree, and
drink ye everi one the water of hi cistern: 18:32 until I come and
tak you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a
land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil oliv and of honey, that ye
may live, and not die: and hearken not unto hezekiah, when he
persuadeth you, saying, the lord will deliv us.

18:33 hath ani of the god of the nation deliv at all hi land
out of the hand of the king of assyria?  18:34 where are the god of
hamath, and of arpad? where are the god of sepharvaim, hena, and
ivah? have they deliv samaria out of mine hand?  18:35 who are
they among all the god of the countries, that have deliv their
countri out of mine hand, that the lord should deliv jerusalem out
of mine hand?  18:36 but the peopl held their peace, and answer him
not a word: for the king' command was, saying, answer him not.

18:37 then came eliakim the son of hilkiah, which wa over the
household, and shebna the scribe, and joah the son of asaph the
recorder, to hezekiah with their cloth rent, and told him the words
of rabshakeh.

19:1 and it came to pass, when king hezekiah heard it, that he rent
hi clothes, and cover himself with sackcloth, and went into the
hous of the lord.

19:2 and he sent eliakim, which wa over the household, and shebna the
scribe, and the elder of the priests, cover with sackcloth, to
isaiah the prophet the son of amoz.

19:3 and they said unto him, thu saith hezekiah, thi day is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and blasphemy; for the children are come to
th birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

19:4 It may be the lord thi god will hear all the word of rabshakeh,
whom the king of assyria hi master hath sent to reproach the living
god; and will reprov the word which the lord thi god hath heard:
wherefor lift up thi prayer for the remnant that are left.

19:5 So the servant of king hezekiah came to isaiah.

19:6 and isaiah said unto them, thu shall ye say to your master, thus
saith the lord, Be not afraid of the word which thou hast heard, with
which the servant of the king of assyria have blasphem me.

19:7 behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour,
and shall return to hi own land; and I will caus him to fall by the
sword in hi own land.

19:8 So rabshakeh returned, and found the king of assyria warring
against libnah: for he had heard that he wa depart from lachish.

19:9 and when he heard say of tirhakah king of ethiopia, behold, he is
com out to fight against thee: he sent messeng again unto
hezekiah, saying, 19:10 thu shall ye speak to hezekiah king of judah,
saying, let not thi god in whom thou trustest deceiv thee, saying,
jerusalem shall not be deliv into the hand of the king of assyria.

19:11 behold, thou hast heard what the king of assyria have done to
al lands, by destroy them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?
19:12 have the god of the nation deliv them which my fathers
hav destroyed; as gozan, and haran, and rezeph, and the children of
eden which were in thelasar?  19:13 where is the king of hamath, and
th king of arpad, and the king of the citi of sepharvaim, of hena,
and ivah?  19:14 and hezekiah receiv the letter of the hand of the
messengers, and read it: and hezekiah went up into the hous of the
lord, and spread it befor the lord.

19:15 and hezekiah pray befor the lord, and said, O lord god of
israel, which dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the god, even
th alone, of all the kingdom of the earth; thou hast made heaven
and earth.

19:16 lord, bow down thine ear, and hear: open, lord, thine eyes, and
see: and hear the word of sennacherib, which hath sent him to
reproach the live god.

19:17 Of a truth, lord, the king of assyria have destroy the
nat and their lands, 19:18 and have cast their god into the fire:
for they were no gods, but the work of men' hands, wood and stone:
therefor they have destroy them.

19:19 now therefore, O lord our god, I beseech thee, save thou us out
of hi hand, that all the kingdom of the earth may know that thou art
th lord god, even thou only.

19:20 then isaiah the son of amoz sent to hezekiah, saying, thu saith
th lord god of israel, that which thou hast pray to me against
sennacherib king of assyria I have heard.

19:21 thi is the word that the lord hath spoken concern him; the
virgin the daughter of zion hath despis thee, and laugh thee to
scorn; the daughter of jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

19:22 whom hast thou reproach and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalt thi voice, and lift up thine eye on high? even against
th holi one of israel.

19:23 By thi messeng thou hast reproach the lord, and hast said,
with the multitud of my chariot I am come up to the height of the
mountains, to the side of lebanon, and will cut down the tall cedar
tre thereof, and the choic fir tree thereof: and I will enter into
th lodg of hi borders, and into the forest of hi carmel.

19:24 I have dig and drunk strang waters, and with the sole of my
feet have I dri up all the river of besieg places.

19:25 hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it, and of ancient
tim that I have form it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
shouldest be to lay wast fenc citi into ruinou heaps.

19:26 therefor their inhabit were of small power, they were
dismay and confounded; they were as the grass of the field, and as
th green herb, as the grass on the hous tops, and as corn blasted
befor it be grown up.

19:27 but I know thi abode, and thi go out, and thi come in, and
thi rage against me.

19:28 becaus thi rage against me and thi tumult is come up into mine
ears, therefor I will put my hook in thi nose, and my bridl in thy
lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

19:29 and thi shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat thi year such
th as grow of themselves, and in the second year that which
springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and
plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.

19:30 and the remnant that is escap of the hous of judah shall yet
again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.

19:31 for out of jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that
escap out of mount zion: the zeal of the lord of host shall do this.

19:32 therefor thu saith the lord concern the king of assyria, he
shal not come into thi city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
befor it with shield, nor cast a bank against it.

19:33 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall
not come into thi city, saith the lord.

19:34 for I will defend thi city, to save it, for mine own sake, and
for my servant david' sake.

19:35 and it came to pass that night, that the angel of the lord went
out, and smote in the camp of the assyrian an hundr fourscor and
fiv thousand: and when they aros earli in the morning, behold, they
wer all dead corpses.

19:36 So sennacherib king of assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at nineveh.

19:37 and it came to pass, as he wa worship in the hous of
nisroch hi god, that adrammelech and sharez hi son smote him with
th sword: and they escap into the land of armenia. and esarhaddon
hi son reign in hi stead.

20:1 In those day wa hezekiah sick unto death. and the prophet
isaiah the son of amoz came to him, and said unto him, thu saith the
lord, set thine hous in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.

20:2 then he turn hi face to the wall, and pray unto the lord,
saying, 20:3 I beseech thee, O lord, rememb now how I have walked
befor thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thi sight. and hezekiah wept sore.

20:4 and it came to pass, afor isaiah wa gone out into the middle
court, that the word of the lord came to him, saying, 20:5 turn again,
and tell hezekiah the captain of my people, thu saith the lord, the
god of david thi father, I have heard thi prayer, I have seen thy
tears: behold, I will heal thee: on the third day thou shalt go up
unto the hous of the lord.

20:6 and I will add unto thi day fifteen years; and I will deliver
the and thi citi out of the hand of the king of assyria; and I will
defend thi citi for mine own sake, and for my servant david' sake.

20:7 and isaiah said, take a lump of figs. and they took and laid it
on the boil, and he recovered.

20:8 and hezekiah said unto isaiah, what shall be the sign that the
lord will heal me, and that I shall go up into the hous of the lord
th third day?  20:9 and isaiah said, thi sign shalt thou have of the
lord, that the lord will do the thing that he hath spoken: shall the
shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees?  20:10 and
hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten
degrees: nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees.

20:11 and isaiah the prophet cri unto the lord: and he brought the
shadow ten degre backward, by which it had gone down in the dial of
ahaz.

20:12 At that time berodachbaladan, the son of baladan, king of
babylon, sent letter and a present unto hezekiah: for he had heard
that hezekiah had been sick.

20:13 and hezekiah hearken unto them, and shew them all the house
of hi preciou things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and
th preciou ointment, and all the hous of hi armour, and all that
wa found in hi treasures: there wa noth in hi house, nor in all
hi dominion, that hezekiah shew them not.

20:14 then came isaiah the prophet unto king hezekiah, and said unto
him, what said these men? and from whenc came they unto thee? and
hezekiah said, they are come from a far country, even from babylon.

20:15 and he said, what have they seen in thine house? and hezekiah
answered, all the thing that are in mine hous have they seen: there
i noth among my treasur that I have not shew them.

20:16 and isaiah said unto hezekiah, hear the word of the lord.

20:17 behold, the day come, that all that is in thine house, and that
which thi father have laid up in store unto thi day, shall be
carri into babylon: noth shall be left, saith the lord.

20:18 and of thi son that shall issu from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuch in the palace
of the king of babylon.

20:19 then said hezekiah unto isaiah, good is the word of the lord
which thou hast spoken. and he said, Is it not good, if peac and
truth be in my days?  20:20 and the rest of the act of hezekiah, and
al hi might, and how he made a pool, and a conduit, and brought
wat into the city, are they not written in the book of the
chronicl of the king of judah?  20:21 and hezekiah slept with his
fathers: and manasseh hi son reign in hi stead.

21:1 manasseh wa twelv year old when he began to reign, and reigned
fifti and five year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
hephzibah.

21:2 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord, after
th abomin of the heathen, whom the lord cast out befor the
children of israel.

21:3 for he built up again the high place which hezekiah hi father
had destroyed; and he rear up altar for baal, and made a grove, as
did ahab king of israel; and worship all the host of heaven, and
serv them.

21:4 and he built altar in the hous of the lord, of which the lord
said, In jerusalem will I put my name.

21:5 and he built altar for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the hous of the lord.

21:6 and he made hi son pass through the fire, and observ times,
and use enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirit and wizards: he
wrought much wicked in the sight of the lord, to provok him to
anger.

21:7 and he set a graven imag of the grove that he had made in the
house, of which the lord said to david, and to solomon hi son, in
thi house, and in jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all tribe of
israel, will I put my name for ever: 21:8 neither will I make the feet
of israel move ani more out of the land which I gave their fathers;
onli if they will observ to do accord to all that I have commanded
them, and accord to all the law that my servant mose commanded
them.

21:9 but they hearken not: and manasseh seduc them to do more evil
than did the nation whom the lord destroy befor the children of
israel.

21:10 and the lord spake by hi servant the prophets, saying, 21:11
becaus manasseh king of judah hath done these abominations, and hath
don wickedli abov all that the amorit did, which were befor him,
and hath made judah also to sin with hi idols: 21:12 therefor thus
saith the lord god of israel, behold, I am bring such evil upon
jerusalem and judah, that whosoev heareth of it, both hi ear shall
tingle.

21:13 and I will stretch over jerusalem the line of samaria, and the
plummet of the hous of ahab: and I will wipe jerusalem as a man
wipeth a dish, wipe it, and turn it upsid down.

21:14 and I will forsak the remnant of mine inheritance, and deliver
them into the hand of their enemies; and they shall becom a prey and
a spoil to all their enemies; 21:15 becaus they have done that which
wa evil in my sight, and have provok me to anger, sinc the day
their father came forth out of egypt, even unto thi day.

21:16 moreov manasseh shed innoc blood veri much, till he had
fil jerusalem from one end to another; besid hi sin wherewith he
mad judah to sin, in do that which wa evil in the sight of the
lord.

21:17 now the rest of the act of manasseh, and all that he did, and
hi sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the
chronicl of the king of judah?  21:18 and manasseh slept with his
fathers, and wa buri in the garden of hi own house, in the garden
of uzza: and amon hi son reign in hi stead.

21:19 amon wa twenti and two year old when he began to reign, and he
reign two year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
meshullemeth, the daughter of haruz of jotbah.

21:20 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord, as his
fath manasseh did.

21:21 and he walk in all the way that hi father walk in, and
serv the idol that hi father served, and worship them: 21:22
and he forsook the lord god of hi fathers, and walk not in the way
of the lord.

21:23 and the servant of amon conspir against him, and slew the
k in hi own house.

21:24 and the peopl of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king amon; and the peopl of the land made josiah hi son king
in hi stead.

21:25 now the rest of the act of amon which he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?  21:26
and he wa buri in hi sepulchr in the garden of uzza: and josiah
hi son reign in hi stead.

22:1 josiah wa eight year old when he began to reign, and he reigned
thirti and one year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name wa jedidah,
th daughter of adaiah of boscath.

22:2 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord, and
walk in all the way of david hi father, and turn not asid to the
right hand or to the left.

22:3 and it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king josiah, that
th king sent shaphan the son of azaliah, the son of meshullam, the
scribe, to the hous of the lord, saying, 22:4 Go up to hilkiah the
high priest, that he may sum the silver which is brought into the
hous of the lord, which the keeper of the door have gather of the
people: 22:5 and let them deliv it into the hand of the doer of the
work, that have the oversight of the hous of the lord: and let them
giv it to the doer of the work which is in the hous of the lord, to
repair the breach of the house, 22:6 unto carpenters, and builders,
and masons, and to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the house.

22:7 howbeit there wa no reckon made with them of the money that
wa deliv into their hand, becaus they dealt faithfully.

22:8 and hilkiah the high priest said unto shaphan the scribe, I have
found the book of the law in the hous of the lord. and hilkiah gave
th book to shaphan, and he read it.

22:9 and shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king
word again, and said, thi servant have gather the money that was
found in the house, and have deliv it into the hand of them that
do the work, that have the oversight of the hous of the lord.

22:10 and shaphan the scribe shew the king, saying, hilkiah the
priest hath deliv me a book. and shaphan read it befor the king.

22:11 and it came to pass, when the king had heard the word of the
book of the law, that he rent hi clothes.

22:12 and the king command hilkiah the priest, and ahikam the son of
shaphan, and achbor the son of michaiah, and shaphan the scribe, and
asahiah a servant of the king's, saying, 22:13 Go ye, enquir of the
lord for me, and for the people, and for all judah, concern the
word of thi book that is found: for great is the wrath of the lord
that is kindl against us, becaus our father have not hearkened
unto the word of thi book, to do accord unto all that which is
written concern us.

22:14 So hilkiah the priest, and ahikam, and achbor, and shaphan, and
asahiah, went unto huldah the prophetess, the wife of shallum the son
of tikvah, the son of harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt
in jerusalem in the college;) and they commun with her.

22:15 and she said unto them, thu saith the lord god of israel, tell
th man that sent you to me, 22:16 thu saith the lord, behold, I will
br evil upon thi place, and upon the inhabit thereof, even all
th word of the book which the king of judah hath read: 22:17 because
they have forsaken me, and have burn incens unto other gods, that
they might provok me to anger with all the work of their hands;
therefor my wrath shall be kindl against thi place, and shall not
b quenched.

22:18 but to the king of judah which sent you to enquir of the lord,
thu shall ye say to him, thu saith the lord god of israel, as
touch the word which thou hast heard; 22:19 becaus thine heart
wa tender, and thou hast humbl thyself befor the lord, when thou
heardest what I spake against thi place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, that they should becom a desol and a curse, and hast
rent thi clothes, and wept befor me; I also have heard thee, saith
th lord.

22:20 behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thi fathers, and thou
shalt be gather into thi grave in peace; and thine eye shall not
se all the evil which I will bring upon thi place. and they brought
th king word again.

23:1 and the king sent, and they gather unto him all the elder of
judah and of jerusalem.

23:2 and the king went up into the hous of the lord, and all the men
of judah and all the inhabit of jerusalem with him, and the
priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great:
and he read in their ear all the word of the book of the covenant
which wa found in the hous of the lord.

23:3 and the king stood by a pillar, and made a coven befor the
lord, to walk after the lord, and to keep hi command and his
testimoni and hi statut with all their heart and all their soul,
to perform the word of thi coven that were written in thi book.
and all the peopl stood to the covenant.

23:4 and the king command hilkiah the high priest, and the priests
of the second order, and the keeper of the door, to bring forth out
of the templ of the lord all the vessel that were made for baal, and
for the grove, and for all the host of heaven: and he burn them
without jerusalem in the field of kidron, and carri the ash of
them unto bethel.

23:5 and he put down the idolatr priests, whom the king of judah
had ordain to burn incens in the high place in the citi of
judah, and in the place round about jerusalem; them also that burned
incens unto baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets,
and to all the host of heaven.

23:6 and he brought out the grove from the hous of the lord, without
jerusalem, unto the brook kidron, and burn it at the brook kidron,
and stamp it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the
grav of the children of the people.

23:7 and he brake down the hous of the sodomites, that were by the
hous of the lord, where the women wove hang for the grove.

23:8 and he brought all the priest out of the citi of judah, and
defil the high place where the priest had burn incense, from
geba to beersheba, and brake down the high place of the gate that
wer in the enter in of the gate of joshua the governor of the
city, which were on a man' left hand at the gate of the city.

23:9 nevertheless the priest of the high place came not up to the
altar of the lord in jerusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened
bread among their brethren.

23:10 and he defil topheth, which is in the valley of the children
of hinnom, that no man might make hi son or hi daughter to pass
through the fire to molech.

23:11 and he took away the hors that the king of judah had given to
th sun, at the enter in of the hous of the lord, by the chamber
of nathanmelech the chamberlain, which wa in the suburbs, and burned
th chariot of the sun with fire.

23:12 and the altar that were on the top of the upper chamber of
ahaz, which the king of judah had made, and the altar which manasseh
had made in the two court of the hous of the lord, did the king beat
down, and brake them down from thence, and cast the dust of them into
th brook kidron.

23:13 and the high place that were befor jerusalem, which were on
th right hand of the mount of corruption, which solomon the king of
israel had build for ashtoreth the abomin of the zidonians, and
for chemosh the abomin of the moabites, and for milcom the
abomin of the children of ammon, did the king defile.

23:14 and he brake in piec the images, and cut down the groves, and
fil their place with the bone of men.

23:15 moreov the altar that wa at bethel, and the high place which
jeroboam the son of nebat, who made israel to sin, had made, both that
altar and the high place he brake down, and burn the high place, and
stamp it small to powder, and burn the grove.

23:16 and as josiah turn himself, he spi the sepulchr that were
ther in the mount, and sent, and took the bone out of the
sepulchres, and burn them upon the altar, and pollut it, according
to the word of the lord which the man of god proclaimed, who
proclaim these words.

23:17 then he said, what titl is that that I see? and the men of the
citi told him, It is the sepulchr of the man of god, which came from
judah, and proclaim these thing that thou hast done against the
altar of bethel.

23:18 and he said, let him alone; let no man move hi bones. So they
let hi bone alone, with the bone of the prophet that came out of
samaria.

23:19 and all the hous also of the high place that were in the
citi of samaria, which the king of israel had made to provok the
lord to anger, josiah took away, and did to them accord to all the
act that he had done in bethel.

23:20 and he slew all the priest of the high place that were there
upon the altars, and burn men' bone upon them, and return to
jerusalem.

23:21 and the king command all the people, saying, keep the passover
unto the lord your god, as it is written in the book of thi covenant.

23:22 sure there wa not holden such a passov from the day of the
judg that judg israel, nor in all the day of the king of israel,
nor of the king of judah; 23:23 but in the eighteenth year of king
josiah, wherein thi passov wa holden to the lord in jerusalem.

23:24 moreov the worker with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and
th images, and the idols, and all the abomin that were spi in
th land of judah and in jerusalem, did josiah put away, that he might
perform the word of the law which were written in the book that
hilkiah the priest found in the hous of the lord.

23:25 and like unto him wa there no king befor him, that turn to
th lord with all hi heart, and with all hi soul, and with all his
might, accord to all the law of moses; neither after him arose
ther ani like him.

23:26 notwithstand the lord turn not from the fierc of his
great wrath, wherewith hi anger wa kindl against judah, becaus of
al the provoc that manasseh had provok him withal.

23:27 and the lord said, I will remov judah also out of my sight, as
i have remov israel, and will cast off thi citi jerusalem which i
hav chosen, and the hous of which I said, My name shall be there.

23:28 now the rest of the act of josiah, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?
23:29 In hi day pharaohnechoh king of egypt went up against the king
of assyria to the river euphrates: and king josiah went against him;
and he slew him at megiddo, when he had seen him.

23:30 and hi servant carri him in a chariot dead from megiddo, and
brought him to jerusalem, and buri him in hi own sepulchre. and the
peopl of the land took jehoahaz the son of josiah, and anoint him,
and made him king in hi father' stead.

23:31 jehoahaz wa twenti and three year old when he began to reign;
and he reign three month in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
hamutal, the daughter of jeremiah of libnah.

23:32 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that hi father had done.

23:33 and pharaohnechoh put him in band at riblah in the land of
hamath, that he might not reign in jerusalem; and put the land to a
tribut of an hundr talent of silver, and a talent of gold.

23:34 and pharaohnechoh made eliakim the son of josiah king in the
room of josiah hi father, and turn hi name to jehoiakim, and took
jehoahaz away: and he came to egypt, and die there.

23:35 and jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to pharaoh; but he
tax the land to give the money accord to the command of
pharaoh: he exact the silver and the gold of the peopl of the land,
of everi one accord to hi taxation, to give it unto pharaohnechoh.

23:36 jehoiakim wa twenti and five year old when he began to reign;
and he reign eleven year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
zebudah, the daughter of pedaiah of rumah.

23:37 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that hi father had done.

24:1 In hi day nebuchadnezzar king of babylon came up, and jehoiakim
becam hi servant three years: then he turn and rebel against
him.

24:2 and the lord sent against him band of the chaldees, and band of
th syrians, and band of the moabites, and band of the children of
ammon, and sent them against judah to destroy it, accord to the
word of the lord, which he spake by hi servant the prophets.

24:3 sure at the command of the lord came thi upon judah, to
remov them out of hi sight, for the sin of manasseh, accord to
al that he did; 24:4 and also for the innoc blood that he shed:
for he fill jerusalem with innoc blood; which the lord would not
pardon.

24:5 now the rest of the act of jehoiakim, and all that he did, are
they not written in the book of the chronicl of the king of judah?
24:6 So jehoiakim slept with hi fathers: and jehoiachin hi son
reign in hi stead.

24:7 and the king of egypt came not again ani more out of hi land:
for the king of babylon had taken from the river of egypt unto the
riv euphrat all that pertain to the king of egypt.

24:8 jehoiachin wa eighteen year old when he began to reign, and he
reign in jerusalem three months. and hi mother' name wa nehushta,
th daughter of elnathan of jerusalem.

24:9 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that hi father had done.

24:10 At that time the servant of nebuchadnezzar king of babylon came
up against jerusalem, and the citi wa besieged.

24:11 and nebuchadnezzar king of babylon came against the city, and
hi servant did besieg it.

24:12 and jehoiachin the king of judah went out to the king of
babylon, he, and hi mother, and hi servants, and hi princes, and
hi officers: and the king of babylon took him in the eighth year of
hi reign.

24:13 and he carri out thenc all the treasur of the hous of the
lord, and the treasur of the king' house, and cut in piec all the
vessel of gold which solomon king of israel had made in the templ of
th lord, as the lord had said.

24:14 and he carri away all jerusalem, and all the princes, and all
th mighti men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the
craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort of the
peopl of the land.

24:15 and he carri away jehoiachin to babylon, and the king's
mother, and the king' wives, and hi officers, and the mighti of the
land, those carri he into captiv from jerusalem to babylon.

24:16 and all the men of might, even seven thousand, and craftsmen and
smith a thousand, all that were strong and apt for war, even them the
k of babylon brought captiv to babylon.

24:17 and the king of babylon made mattaniah hi father' brother king
in hi stead, and chang hi name to zedekiah.

24:18 zedekiah wa twenti and one year old when he began to reign,
and he reign eleven year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
hamutal, the daughter of jeremiah of libnah.

24:19 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that jehoiakim had done.

24:20 for through the anger of the lord it came to pass in jerusalem
and judah, until he had cast them out from hi presence, that zedekiah
rebel against the king of babylon.

25:1 and it came to pass in the ninth year of hi reign, in the tenth
month, in the tenth day of the month, that nebuchadnezzar king of
babylon came, he, and all hi host, against jerusalem, and pitched
against it; and they built fort against it round about.

25:2 and the citi wa besieg unto the eleventh year of king
zedekiah.

25:3 and on the ninth day of the fourth month the famin prevail in
th city, and there wa no bread for the peopl of the land.

25:4 and the citi wa broken up, and all the men of war fled by night
bi the way of the gate between two walls, which is by the king's
garden: (now the chalde were against the citi round about:) and the
k went the way toward the plain.

25:5 and the armi of the chalde pursu after the king, and overtook
him in the plain of jericho: and all hi armi were scatter from
him.

25:6 So they took the king, and brought him up to the king of babylon
to riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.

25:7 and they slew the son of zedekiah befor hi eyes, and put out
th eye of zedekiah, and bound him with fetter of brass, and carried
him to babylon.

25:8 and in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which is
th nineteenth year of king nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, came
nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, a servant of the king of babylon,
unto jerusalem: 25:9 and he burnt the hous of the lord, and the
king' house, and all the hous of jerusalem, and everi great man's
hous burnt he with fire.

25:10 and all the armi of the chaldees, that were with the captain of
th guard, brake down the wall of jerusalem round about.

25:11 now the rest of the peopl that were left in the city, and the
fugit that fell away to the king of babylon, with the remnant of
th multitude, did nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carri away.

25:12 but the captain of the guard left of the door of the poor of the
land to be vinedress and husbandmen.

25:13 and the pillar of brass that were in the hous of the lord, and
th bases, and the brasen sea that wa in the hous of the lord, did
th chalde break in pieces, and carri the brass of them to
babylon.

25:14 and the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons,
and all the vessel of brass wherewith they ministered, took they
away.

25:15 and the firepans, and the bowls, and such thing as were of
gold, in gold, and of silver, in silver, the captain of the guard took
away.

25:16 the two pillars, one sea, and the base which solomon had made
for the hous of the lord; the brass of all these vessel wa without
weight.

25:17 the height of the one pillar wa eighteen cubits, and the
chapit upon it wa brass: and the height of the chapit three
cubits; and the wreathen work, and pomegran upon the chapiter
round about, all of brass: and like unto these had the second pillar
with wreathen work.

25:18 and the captain of the guard took seraiah the chief priest, and
zephaniah the second priest, and the three keeper of the door: 25:19
and out of the citi he took an offic that wa set over the men of
war, and five men of them that were in the king' presence, which were
found in the city, and the princip scribe of the host, which
must the peopl of the land, and threescor men of the peopl of
th land that were found in the city: 25:20 and nebuzaradan captain of
th guard took these, and brought them to the king of babylon to
riblah: 25:21 and the king of babylon smote them, and slew them at
riblah in the land of hamath. So judah wa carri away out of their
land.

25:22 and as for the peopl that remain in the land of judah, whom
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon had left, even over them he made
gedaliah the son of ahikam, the son of shaphan, ruler.

25:23 and when all the captain of the armies, they and their men,
heard that the king of babylon had made gedaliah governor, there came
to gedaliah to mizpah, even ishmael the son of nethaniah, and johanan
th son of careah, and seraiah the son of tanhumeth the netophathite,
and jaazaniah the son of a maachathite, they and their men.

25:24 and gedaliah sware to them, and to their men, and said unto
them, fear not to be the servant of the chaldees: dwell in the land,
and serv the king of babylon; and it shall be well with you.

25:25 but it came to pass in the seventh month, that ishmael the son
of nethaniah, the son of elishama, of the seed royal, came, and ten
men with him, and smote gedaliah, that he died, and the jew and the
chalde that were with him at mizpah.

25:26 and all the people, both small and great, and the captain of
th armies, arose, and came to egypt: for they were afraid of the
chaldees.

25:27 and it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
capt of jehoiachin king of judah, in the twelfth month, on the
seven and twentieth day of the month, that evilmerodach king of
babylon in the year that he began to reign did lift up the head of
jehoiachin king of judah out of prison; 25:28 and he spake kindli to
him, and set hi throne abov the throne of the king that were with
him in babylon; 25:29 and chang hi prison garments: and he did eat
bread continu befor him all the day of hi life.

25:30 and hi allow wa a continu allow given him of the
king, a daili rate for everi day, all the day of hi life.




th first book of the chronicles


1:1 adam, sheth, enosh, 1:2 kenan, mahalaleel, jered, 1:3 henoch,
methuselah, lamech, 1:4 noah, shem, ham, and japheth.

1:5 the son of japheth; gomer, and magog, and madai, and javan, and
tubal, and meshech, and tiras.

1:6 and the son of gomer; ashchenaz, and riphath, and togarmah.

1:7 and the son of javan; elishah, and tarshish, kittim, and dodanim.

1:8 the son of ham; cush, and mizraim, put, and canaan.

1:9 and the son of cush; seba, and havilah, and sabta, and raamah,
and sabtecha. and the son of raamah; sheba, and dedan.

1:10 and cush begat nimrod: he began to be mighti upon the earth.

1:11 and mizraim begat ludim, and anamim, and lehabim, and naphtuhim,
1:12 and pathrusim, and casluhim, (of whom came the philistines,) and
caphthorim.

1:13 and canaan begat zidon hi firstborn, and heth, 1:14 the jebusite
also, and the amorite, and the girgashite, 1:15 and the hivite, and
th arkite, and the sinite, 1:16 and the arvadite, and the zemarite,
and the hamathite.

1:17 the son of shem; elam, and asshur, and arphaxad, and lud, and
aram, and uz, and hul, and gether, and meshech.

1:18 and arphaxad begat shelah, and shelah begat eber.

1:19 and unto eber were born two sons: the name of the one wa peleg;
becaus in hi day the earth wa divided: and hi brother' name was
joktan.

1:20 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 1:21 hadoram also, and uzal, and diklah, 1:22 and ebal, and
abimael, and sheba, 1:23 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab. all these
wer the son of joktan.

1:24 shem, arphaxad, shelah, 1:25 eber, peleg, reu, 1:26 serug, nahor,
terah, 1:27 abram; the same is abraham.

1:28 the son of abraham; isaac, and ishmael.

1:29 these are their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebaioth;
then kedar, and adbeel, and mibsam, 1:30 mishma, and dumah, massa,
hadad, and tema, 1:31 jetur, naphish, and kedemah. these are the sons
of ishmael.

1:32 now the son of keturah, abraham' concubine: she bare zimran,
and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and ishbak, and shuah. and the
son of jokshan; sheba, and dedan.

1:33 and the son of midian; ephah, and epher, and henoch, and abida,
and eldaah. all these are the son of keturah.

1:34 and abraham begat isaac. the son of isaac; esau and israel.

1:35 the son of esau; eliphaz, reuel, and jeush, and jaalam, and
korah.

1:36 the son of eliphaz; teman, and omar, zephi, and gatam, kenaz,
and timna, and amalek.

1:37 the son of reuel; nahath, zerah, shammah, and mizzah.

1:38 and the son of seir; lotan, and shobal, and zibeon, and anah,
and dishon, and ezar, and dishan.

1:39 and the son of lotan; hori, and homam: and timna wa lotan's
sister.

1:40 the son of shobal; alian, and manahath, and ebal, shephi, and
onam.

and the son of zibeon; aiah, and anah.

1:41 the son of anah; dishon. and the son of dishon; amram, and
eshban, and ithran, and cheran.

1:42 the son of ezer; bilhan, and zavan, and jakan. the son of
dishan; uz, and aran.

1:43 now these are the king that reign in the land of edom before
ani king reign over the children of israel; bela the son of beor:
and the name of hi citi wa dinhabah.

1:44 and when bela wa dead, jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reigned
in hi stead.

1:45 and when jobab wa dead, husham of the land of the temanites
reign in hi stead.

1:46 and when husham wa dead, hadad the son of bedad, which smote
midian in the field of moab, reign in hi stead: and the name of his
citi wa avith.

1:47 and when hadad wa dead, samlah of masrekah reign in hi stead.

1:48 and when samlah wa dead, shaul of rehoboth by the river reigned
in hi stead.

1:49 and when shaul wa dead, baalhanan the son of achbor reign in
hi stead.

1:50 and when baalhanan wa dead, hadad reign in hi stead: and the
nam of hi citi wa pai; and hi wife' name wa mehetabel, the
daught of matred, the daughter of mezahab.

1:51 hadad die also. and the duke of edom were; duke timnah, duke
aliah, duke jetheth, 1:52 duke aholibamah, duke elah, duke pinon, 1:53
duke kenaz, duke teman, duke mibzar, 1:54 duke magdiel, duke iram.
thes are the duke of edom.

2:1 these are the son of israel; reuben, simeon, levi, and judah,
issachar, and zebulun, 2:2 dan, joseph, and benjamin, naphtali, gad,
and asher.

2:3 the son of judah; er, and onan, and shelah: which three were born
unto him of the daughter of shua the canaanitess. and er, the
firstborn of judah, wa evil in the sight of the lord; and he slew
him.

2:4 and tamar hi daughter in law bore him pharez and zerah. all the
son of judah were five.

2:5 the son of pharez; hezron, and hamul.

2:6 and the son of zerah; zimri, and ethan, and heman, and calcol,
and dara: five of them in all.

2:7 and the son of carmi; achar, the troubler of israel, who
transgress in the thing accursed.

2:8 and the son of ethan; azariah.

2:9 the son also of hezron, that were born unto him; jerahmeel, and
ram, and chelubai.

2:10 and ram begat amminadab; and amminadab begat nahshon, princ of
th children of judah; 2:11 and nahshon begat salma, and salma begat
boaz, 2:12 and boaz begat obed, and obe begat jesse, 2:13 and jesse
begat hi firstborn eliab, and abinadab the second, and shimma the
third, 2:14 nethaneel the fourth, raddai the fifth, 2:15 ozem the
sixth, david the seventh: 2:16 whose sister were zeruiah, and
abigail. and the son of zeruiah; abishai, and joab, and asahel,
three.

2:17 and abigail bare amasa: and the father of amasa wa jether the
ishmeelite.

2:18 and caleb the son of hezron begat children of azubah hi wife,
and of jerioth: her son are these; jesher, and shobab, and ardon.

2:19 and when azubah wa dead, caleb took unto him ephrath, which bare
him hur.

2:20 and hur begat uri, and uri begat bezaleel.

2:21 and afterward hezron went in to the daughter of machir the father
of gilead, whom he marri when he wa threescor year old; and she
bar him segub.

2:22 and segub begat jair, who had three and twenti citi in the land
of gilead.

2:23 and he took geshur, and aram, with the town of jair, from them,
with kenath, and the town thereof, even threescor cities. all these
belong to the son of machir the father of gilead.

2:24 and after that hezron wa dead in calebephratah, then abiah
hezron' wife bare him ashur the father of tekoa.

2:25 and the son of jerahmeel the firstborn of hezron were, ram the
firstborn, and bunah, and oren, and ozem, and ahijah.

2:26 jerahmeel had also anoth wife, whose name wa atarah; she was
th mother of onam.

2:27 and the son of ram the firstborn of jerahmeel were, maaz, and
jamin, and eker.

2:28 and the son of onam were, shammai, and jada. and the son of
shammai; nadab and abishur.

2:29 and the name of the wife of abishur wa abihail, and she bare him
ahban, and molid.

2:30 and the son of nadab; seled, and appaim: but sele die without
children.

2:31 and the son of appaim; ishi. and the son of ishi; sheshan. and
th children of sheshan; ahlai.

2:32 and the son of jada the brother of shammai; jether, and
jonathan: and jether die without children.

2:33 and the son of jonathan; peleth, and zaza. these were the sons
of jerahmeel.

2:34 now sheshan had no sons, but daughters. and sheshan had a
servant, an egyptian, whose name wa jarha.

2:35 and sheshan gave hi daughter to jarha hi servant to wife; and
sh bare him attai.

2:36 and attai begat nathan, and nathan begat zabad, 2:37 and zabad
begat ephlal, and ephlal begat obed, 2:38 and obe begat jehu, and
jehu begat azariah, 2:39 and azariah begat helez, and helez begat
eleasah, 2:40 and eleasah begat sisamai, and sisamai begat shallum,
2:41 and shallum begat jekamiah, and jekamiah begat elishama.

2:42 now the son of caleb the brother of jerahmeel were, mesha his
firstborn, which wa the father of ziph; and the son of mareshah the
fath of hebron.

2:43 and the son of hebron; korah, and tappuah, and rekem, and shema.

2:44 and shema begat raham, the father of jorkoam: and rekem begat
shammai.

2:45 and the son of shammai wa maon: and maon wa the father of
bethzur.

2:46 and ephah, caleb' concubine, bare haran, and moza, and gazez:
and haran begat gazez.

2:47 and the son of jahdai; regem, and jotham, and gesham, and pelet,
and ephah, and shaaph.

2:48 maachah, caleb' concubine, bare sheber, and tirhanah.

2:49 she bare also shaaph the father of madmannah, sheva the father of
machbenah, and the father of gibea: and the daughter of caleb was
achsa.

2:50 these were the son of caleb the son of hur, the firstborn of
ephratah; shobal the father of kirjathjearim.

2:51 salma the father of bethlehem, hareph the father of bethgader.

2:52 and shobal the father of kirjathjearim had sons; haroeh, and half
of the manahethites.

2:53 and the famili of kirjathjearim; the ithrites, and the puhites,
and the shumathites, and the mishraites; of them came the zareathites,
and the eshtaulites, 2:54 the son of salma; bethlehem, and the
netophathites, ataroth, the hous of joab, and half of the
manahethites, the zorites.

2:55 and the famili of the scribe which dwelt at jabez; the
tirathites, the shimeathites, and suchathites. these are the kenites
that came of hemath, the father of the hous of rechab.

3:1 now these were the son of david, which were born unto him in
hebron; the firstborn amnon, of ahinoam the jezreelitess; the second
daniel, of abigail the carmelitess: 3:2 the third, absalom the son of
maachah the daughter of talmai king of geshur: the fourth, adonijah
th son of haggith: 3:3 the fifth, shephatiah of abital: the sixth,
ithream by eglah hi wife.

3:4 these six were born unto him in hebron; and there he reign seven
year and six months: and in jerusalem he reign thirti and three
years.

3:5 and these were born unto him in jerusalem; shimea, and shobab, and
nathan, and solomon, four, of bathshua the daughter of ammiel: 3:6
ibhar also, and elishama, and eliphelet, 3:7 and nogah, and nepheg,
and japhia, 3:8 and elishama, and eliada, and eliphelet, nine.

3:9 these were all the son of david, besid the son of the
concubines, and tamar their sister.

3:10 and solomon' son wa rehoboam, abia hi son, asa hi son,
jehoshaphat hi son, 3:11 joram hi son, ahaziah hi son, joash his
son, 3:12 amaziah hi son, azariah hi son, jotham hi son, 3:13 ahaz
hi son, hezekiah hi son, manasseh hi son, 3:14 amon hi son, josiah
hi son.

3:15 and the son of josiah were, the firstborn johanan, the second
jehoiakim, the third zedekiah, the fourth shallum.

3:16 and the son of jehoiakim: jeconiah hi son, zedekiah hi son.

3:17 and the son of jeconiah; assir, salathiel hi son, 3:18
malchiram also, and pedaiah, and shenazar, jecamiah, hoshama, and
nedabiah.

3:19 and the son of pedaiah were, zerubbabel, and shimei: and the
son of zerubbabel; meshullam, and hananiah, and shelomith their
sister: 3:20 and hashubah, and ohel, and berechiah, and hasadiah,
jushabhesed, five.

3:21 and the son of hananiah; pelatiah, and jesaiah: the son of
rephaiah, the son of arnan, the son of obadiah, the son of
shechaniah.

3:22 and the son of shechaniah; shemaiah: and the son of shemaiah;
hattush, and igeal, and bariah, and neariah, and shaphat, six.

3:23 and the son of neariah; elioenai, and hezekiah, and azrikam,
three.

3:24 and the son of elioenai were, hodaiah, and eliashib, and
pelaiah, and akkub, and johanan, and dalaiah, and anani, seven.

4:1 the son of judah; pharez, hezron, and carmi, and hur, and shobal.

4:2 and reaiah the son of shobal begat jahath; and jahath begat
ahumai, and lahad. these are the famili of the zorathites.

4:3 and these were of the father of etam; jezreel, and ishma, and
idbash: and the name of their sister wa hazelelponi: 4:4 and penuel
th father of gedor, and ezer the father of hushah. these are the sons
of hur, the firstborn of ephratah, the father of bethlehem.

4:5 and ashur the father of tekoa had two wives, helah and naarah.

4:6 and naarah bare him ahuzam, and hepher, and temeni, and
haahashtari.

thes were the son of naarah.

4:7 and the son of helah were, zereth, and jezoar, and ethnan.

4:8 and coz begat anub, and zobebah, and the famili of aharhel the
son of harum.

4:9 and jabez wa more honour than hi brethren: and hi mother
cal hi name jabez, saying, becaus I bare him with sorrow.

4:10 and jabez call on the god of israel, saying, Oh that thou
wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarg my coast, and that thine hand
might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it
may not griev me! and god grant him that which he requested.

4:11 and chelub the brother of shuah begat mehir, which wa the father
of eshton.

4:12 and eshton begat bethrapha, and paseah, and tehinnah the father
of irnahash. these are the men of rechah.

4:13 and the son of kenaz; othniel, and seraiah: and the son of
othniel; hathath.

4:14 and meonothai begat ophrah: and seraiah begat joab, the father of
th valley of charashim; for they were craftsmen.

4:15 and the son of caleb the son of jephunneh; iru, elah, and naam:
and the son of elah, even kenaz.

4:16 and the son of jehaleleel; ziph, and ziphah, tiria, and asareel.

4:17 and the son of ezra were, jether, and mered, and epher, and
jalon: and she bare miriam, and shammai, and ishbah the father of
eshtemoa.

4:18 and hi wife jehudijah bare jere the father of gedor, and heber
th father of socho, and jekuthiel the father of zanoah. and these are
th son of bithiah the daughter of pharaoh, which mere took.

4:19 and the son of hi wife hodiah the sister of naham, the father
of keilah the garmite, and eshtemoa the maachathite.

4:20 and the son of shimon were, amnon, and rinnah, benhanan, and
tilon.

and the son of ishi were, zoheth, and benzoheth.

4:21 the son of shelah the son of judah were, Er the father of lecah,
and laadah the father of mareshah, and the famili of the hous of
them that wrought fine linen, of the hous of ashbea, 4:22 and jokim,
and the men of chozeba, and joash, and saraph, who had the dominion in
moab, and jashubilehem. and these are ancient things.

4:23 these were the potters, and those that dwelt among plant and
hedges: there they dwelt with the king for hi work.

4:24 the son of simeon were, nemuel, and jamin, jarib, zerah, and
shaul: 4:25 shallum hi son, mibsam hi son, mishma hi son.

4:26 and the son of mishma; hamuel hi son, zacchur hi son, shimei
hi son.

4:27 and shimei had sixteen son and six daughters: but hi brethren
had not mani children, neither did all their famili multiply, like to
th children of judah.

4:28 and they dwelt at beersheba, and moladah, and hazarshual, 4:29
and at bilhah, and at ezem, and at tolad, 4:30 and at bethuel, and at
hormah, and at ziklag, 4:31 and at bethmarcaboth, and hazarsusim, and
at bethbirei, and at shaaraim. these were their citi unto the reign
of david.

4:32 and their villag were, etam, and ain, rimmon, and tochen, and
ashan, five cities: 4:33 and all their villag that were round about
th same cities, unto baal. these were their habitations, and their
genealogy.

4:34 and meshobab, and jamlech, and joshah, the son of amaziah, 4:35
and joel, and jehu the son of josibiah, the son of seraiah, the son of
asiel, 4:36 and elioenai, and jaakobah, and jeshohaiah, and asaiah,
and adiel, and jesimiel, and benaiah, 4:37 and ziza the son of shiphi,
th son of allon, the son of jedaiah, the son of shimri, the son of
shemaiah; 4:38 these mention by their name were princ in their
families: and the hous of their father increas greatly.

4:39 and they went to the entranc of gedor, even unto the east side
of the valley, to seek pastur for their flocks.

4:40 and they found fat pastur and good, and the land wa wide, and
quiet, and peaceable; for they of ham had dwelt there of old.

4:41 and these written by name came in the day of hezekiah king of
judah, and smote their tents, and the habit that were found
there, and destroy them utterli unto thi day, and dwelt in their
rooms: becaus there wa pastur there for their flocks.

4:42 and some of them, even of the son of simeon, five hundr men,
went to mount seir, have for their captain pelatiah, and neariah,
and rephaiah, and uzziel, the son of ishi.

4:43 and they smote the rest of the amalekit that were escaped, and
dwelt there unto thi day.

5:1 now the son of reuben the firstborn of israel, (for he wa the
firstborn; but forasmuch as he defil hi father' bed, his
birthright wa given unto the son of joseph the son of israel: and
th genealog is not to be reckon after the birthright.

5:2 for judah prevail abov hi brethren, and of him came the chief
ruler; but the birthright wa joseph's:) 5:3 the sons, I say, of
reuben the firstborn of israel were, hanoch, and pallu, hezron, and
carmi.

5:4 the son of joel; shemaiah hi son, gog hi son, shimei hi son,
5:5 micah hi son, reaia hi son, baal hi son, 5:6 beerah hi son,
whom tilgathpilnes king of assyria carri away captive: he was
princ of the reubenites.

5:7 and hi brethren by their families, when the genealog of their
gener wa reckoned, were the chief, jeiel, and zechariah, 5:8
and bela the son of azaz, the son of shema, the son of joel, who dwelt
in aroer, even unto nebo and baalmeon: 5:9 and eastward he inhabited
unto the enter in of the wilder from the river euphrates:
becaus their cattl were multipli in the land of gilead.

5:10 and in the day of saul they made war with the hagarites, who
fel by their hand: and they dwelt in their tent throughout all the
east land of gilead.

5:11 and the children of gad dwelt over against them, in the land of
bashan unto salcah: 5:12 joel the chief, and shapham the next, and
jaanai, and shaphat in bashan.

5:13 and their brethren of the hous of their father were, michael,
and meshullam, and sheba, and jorai, and jachan, and zia, and heber,
seven.

5:14 these are the children of abihail the son of huri, the son of
jaroah, the son of gilead, the son of michael, the son of jeshishai,
th son of jahdo, the son of buz; 5:15 ahi the son of abdiel, the son
of guni, chief of the hous of their fathers.

5:16 and they dwelt in gilead in bashan, and in her towns, and in all
th suburb of sharon, upon their borders.

5:17 all these were reckon by genealog in the day of jotham king
of judah, and in the day of jeroboam king of israel.

5:18 the son of reuben, and the gadites, and half the tribe of
manasseh, of valiant men, men abl to bear buckler and sword, and to
shoot with bow, and skil in war, were four and forti thousand seven
hundr and threescore, that went out to the war.

5:19 and they made war with the hagarites, with jetur, and nephish,
and nodab.

5:20 and they were help against them, and the hagarit were
deliv into their hand, and all that were with them: for they cried
to god in the battle, and he wa intreat of them; becaus they put
their trust in him.

5:21 and they took away their cattle; of their camel fifti thousand,
and of sheep two hundr and fifti thousand, and of ass two
thousand, and of men an hundr thousand.

5:22 for there fell down mani slain, becaus the war wa of god. and
they dwelt in their stead until the captivity.

5:23 and the children of the half tribe of manasseh dwelt in the land:
they increas from bashan unto baalhermon and senir, and unto mount
hermon.

5:24 and these were the head of the hous of their fathers, even
epher, and ishi, and eliel, and azriel, and jeremiah, and hodaviah,
and jahdiel, mighti men of valour, famou men, and head of the house
of their fathers.

5:25 and they transgress against the god of their fathers, and went
a whore after the god of the peopl of the land, whom god destroyed
befor them.

5:26 and the god of israel stir up the spirit of pul king of
assyria, and the spirit of tilgathpilnes king of assyria, and he
carri them away, even the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
trib of manasseh, and brought them unto halah, and habor, and hara,
and to the river gozan, unto thi day.

6:1 the son of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

6:2 and the son of kohath; amram, izhar, and hebron, and uzziel.

6:3 and the children of amram; aaron, and moses, and miriam. the sons
also of aaron; nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

6:4 eleazar begat phinehas, phineha begat abishua, 6:5 and abishua
begat bukki, and bukki begat uzzi, 6:6 and uzzi begat zerahiah, and
zerahiah begat meraioth, 6:7 meraioth begat amariah, and amariah begat
ahitub, 6:8 and ahitub begat zadok, and zadok begat ahimaaz, 6:9 and
ahimaaz begat azariah, and azariah begat johanan, 6:10 and johanan
begat azariah, (he it is that execut the priest' offic in the
templ that solomon built in jerusalem:) 6:11 and azariah begat
amariah, and amariah begat ahitub, 6:12 and ahitub begat zadok, and
zadok begat shallum, 6:13 and shallum begat hilkiah, and hilkiah begat
azariah, 6:14 and azariah begat seraiah, and seraiah begat jehozadak,
6:15 and jehozadak went into captivity, when the lord carri away
judah and jerusalem by the hand of nebuchadnezzar.

6:16 the son of levi; gershom, kohath, and merari.

6:17 and these be the name of the son of gershom; libni, and shimei.

6:18 and the son of kohath were, amram, and izhar, and hebron, and
uzziel.

6:19 the son of merari; mahli, and mushi. and these are the families
of the levit accord to their fathers.

6:20 Of gershom; libni hi son, jahath hi son, zimmah hi son, 6:21
joah hi son, iddo hi son, zerah hi son, jeaterai hi son.

6:22 the son of kohath; amminadab hi son, korah hi son, assir his
son, 6:23 elkanah hi son, and ebiasaph hi son, and assir hi son,
6:24 tahath hi son, uriel hi son, uzziah hi son, and shaul hi son.

6:25 and the son of elkanah; amasai, and ahimoth.

6:26 As for elkanah: the son of elkanah; zophai hi son, and nahath
hi son, 6:27 eliab hi son, jeroham hi son, elkanah hi son.

6:28 and the son of samuel; the firstborn vashni, and abiah.

6:29 the son of merari; mahli, libni hi son, shimei hi son, uzza
hi son, 6:30 shimea hi son, haggiah hi son, asaiah hi son.

6:31 and these are they whom david set over the servic of song in the
hous of the lord, after that the ark had rest.

6:32 and they minist befor the dwell place of the tabernacle
of the congreg with singing, until solomon had built the hous of
th lord in jerusalem: and then they wait on their offic according
to their order.

6:33 and these are they that wait with their children. Of the sons
of the kohathites: heman a singer, the son of joel, the son of
shemuel, 6:34 the son of elkanah, the son of jeroham, the son of
eliel, the son of toah, 6:35 the son of zuph, the son of elkanah, the
son of mahath, the son of amasai, 6:36 the son of elkanah, the son of
joel, the son of azariah, the son of zephaniah, 6:37 the son of
tahath, the son of assir, the son of ebiasaph, the son of korah, 6:38
the son of izhar, the son of kohath, the son of levi, the son of
israel.

6:39 and hi brother asaph, who stood on hi right hand, even asaph
th son of berachiah, the son of shimea, 6:40 the son of michael, the
son of baaseiah, the son of malchiah, 6:41 the son of ethni, the son
of zerah, the son of adaiah, 6:42 the son of ethan, the son of zimmah,
th son of shimei, 6:43 the son of jahath, the son of gershom, the son
of levi.

6:44 and their brethren the son of merari stood on the left hand:
ethan the son of kishi, the son of abdi, the son of malluch, 6:45 the
son of hashabiah, the son of amaziah, the son of hilkiah, 6:46 the son
of amzi, the son of bani, the son of shamer, 6:47 the son of mahli,
th son of mushi, the son of merari, the son of levi.

6:48 their brethren also the levit were appoint unto all manner of
servic of the tabernacl of the hous of god.

6:49 but aaron and hi son offer upon the altar of the burnt
offering, and on the altar of incense, and were appoint for all the
work of the place most holy, and to make an aton for israel,
accord to all that mose the servant of god had commanded.

6:50 and these are the son of aaron; eleazar hi son, phineha his
son, abishua hi son, 6:51 bukki hi son, uzzi hi son, zerahiah his
son, 6:52 meraioth hi son, amariah hi son, ahitub hi son, 6:53
zadok hi son, ahimaaz hi son.

6:54 now these are their dwell place throughout their castl in
their coasts, of the son of aaron, of the famili of the kohathites:
for their wa the lot.

6:55 and they gave them hebron in the land of judah, and the suburbs
thereof round about it.

6:56 but the field of the city, and the villag thereof, they gave
to caleb the son of jephunneh.

6:57 and to the son of aaron they gave the citi of judah, namely,
hebron, the citi of refuge, and libnah with her suburbs, and jattir,
and eshtemoa, with their suburbs, 6:58 and hilen with her suburbs,
debir with her suburbs, 6:59 and ashan with her suburbs, and
bethshemesh with her suburbs: 6:60 and out of the tribe of benjamin;
geba with her suburbs, and alemeth with her suburbs, and anathoth with
her suburbs. all their citi throughout their famili were thirteen
cities.

6:61 and unto the son of kohath, which were left of the famili of
that tribe, were citi given out of the half tribe, namely, out of
th half tribe of manasseh, by lot, ten cities.

6:62 and to the son of gershom throughout their famili out of the
trib of issachar, and out of the tribe of asher, and out of the tribe
of naphtali, and out of the tribe of manasseh in bashan, thirteen
cities.

6:63 unto the son of merari were given by lot, throughout their
families, out of the tribe of reuben, and out of the tribe of gad, and
out of the tribe of zebulun, twelv cities.

6:64 and the children of israel gave to the levit these citi with
their suburbs.

6:65 and they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of judah,
and out of the tribe of the children of simeon, and out of the tribe
of the children of benjamin, these cities, which are call by their
names.

6:66 and the residu of the famili of the son of kohath had cities
of their coast out of the tribe of ephraim.

6:67 and they gave unto them, of the citi of refuge, shechem in
mount ephraim with her suburbs; they gave also gezer with her suburbs,
6:68 and jokmeam with her suburbs, and bethhoron with her suburbs,
6:69 and aijalon with her suburbs, and gathrimmon with her suburbs:
6:70 and out of the half tribe of manasseh; aner with her suburbs, and
bileam with her suburbs, for the famili of the remnant of the son of
kohath.

6:71 unto the son of gershom were given out of the famili of the half
trib of manasseh, golan in bashan with her suburbs, and ashtaroth
with her suburbs: 6:72 and out of the tribe of issachar; kedesh with
her suburbs, daberath with her suburbs, 6:73 and ramoth with her
suburbs, and anem with her suburbs: 6:74 and out of the tribe of
asher; mashal with her suburbs, and abdon with her suburbs, 6:75 and
hukok with her suburbs, and rehob with her suburbs: 6:76 and out of
th tribe of naphtali; kedesh in galile with her suburbs, and hammon
with her suburbs, and kirjathaim with her suburbs.

6:77 unto the rest of the children of merari were given out of the
trib of zebulun, rimmon with her suburbs, tabor with her suburbs:
6:78 and on the other side jordan by jericho, on the east side of
jordan, were given them out of the tribe of reuben, bezer in the
wild with her suburbs, and jahzah with her suburbs, 6:79
kedemoth also with her suburbs, and mephaath with her suburbs: 6:80
and out of the tribe of gad; ramoth in gilead with her suburbs, and
mahanaim with her suburbs, 6:81 and heshbon with her suburbs, and
jaz with her suburbs.

7:1 now the son of issachar were, tola, and puah, jashub, and
shimrom, four.

7:2 and the son of tola; uzzi, and rephaiah, and jeriel, and jahmai,
and jibsam, and shemuel, head of their father' house, to wit, of
tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose
numb wa in the day of david two and twenti thousand and six
hundred.

7:3 and the son of uzzi; izrahiah: and the son of izrahiah; michael,
and obadiah, and joel, ishiah, five: all of them chief men.

7:4 and with them, by their generations, after the hous of their
fathers, were band of soldier for war, six and thirti thousand men:
for they had mani wive and sons.

7:5 and their brethren among all the famili of issachar were valiant
men of might, reckon in all by their genealog fourscor and seven
thousand.

7:6 the son of benjamin; bela, and becher, and jediael, three.

7:7 and the son of bela; ezbon, and uzzi, and uzziel, and jerimoth,
and iri, five; head of the hous of their fathers, mighti men of
valour; and were reckon by their genealog twenti and two thousand
and thirti and four.

7:8 and the son of becher; zemira, and joash, and eliezer, and
elioenai, and omri, and jerimoth, and abiah, and anathoth, and
alameth. all these are the son of becher.

7:9 and the number of them, after their genealog by their
generations, head of the hous of their fathers, mighti men of
valour, wa twenti thousand and two hundred.

7:10 the son also of jediael; bilhan: and the son of bilhan; jeush,
and benjamin, and ehud, and chenaanah, and zethan, and tharshish, and
ahishahar.

7:11 all these the son of jediael, by the head of their fathers,
mighti men of valour, were seventeen thousand and two hundred
soldiers, fit to go out for war and battle.

7:12 shuppim also, and huppim, the children of ir, and hushim, the
son of aher.

7:13 the son of naphtali; jahziel, and guni, and jezer, and shallum,
th son of bilhah.

7:14 the son of manasseh; ashriel, whom she bare: (but hi concubine
th aramitess bare machir the father of gilead: 7:15 and machir took
to wife the sister of huppim and shuppim, whose sister' name was
maachah;) and the name of the second wa zelophehad: and zelophehad
had daughters.

7:16 and maachah the wife of machir bare a son, and she call his
nam peresh; and the name of hi brother wa sheresh; and hi sons
wer ulam and rakem.

7:17 and the son of ulam; bedan. these were the son of gilead, the
son of machir, the son of manasseh.

7:18 and hi sister hammoleketh bare ishod, and abiezer, and mahalah.

7:19 and the son of shemidah were, ahian, and shechem, and likhi, and
aniam.

7:20 and the son of ephraim; shuthelah, and bere hi son, and tahath
hi son, and eladah hi son, and tahath hi son, 7:21 and zabad his
son, and shuthelah hi son, and ezer, and elead, whom the men of gath
that were born in that land slew, becaus they came down to take away
their cattle.

7:22 and ephraim their father mourn mani days, and hi brethren came
to comfort him.

7:23 and when he went in to hi wife, she conceived, and bare a son,
and he call hi name beriah, becaus it went evil with hi house.

7:24 (and hi daughter wa sherah, who built bethhoron the nether, and
th upper, and uzzensherah.)  7:25 and rephah wa hi son, also
resheph, and telah hi son, and tahan hi son.

7:26 laadan hi son, ammihud hi son, elishama hi son.

7:27 non hi son, jehoshuah hi son.

7:28 and their possess and habit were, bethel and the towns
thereof, and eastward naaran, and westward gezer, with the towns
thereof; shechem also and the town thereof, unto gaza and the towns
thereof: 7:29 and by the border of the children of manasseh,
bethshean and her towns, taanach and her towns, megiddo and her towns,
dor and her towns. In these dwelt the children of joseph the son of
israel.

7:30 the son of asher; imnah, and isuah, and ishuai, and beriah, and
serah their sister.

7:31 and the son of beriah; heber, and malchiel, who is the father of
birzavith.

7:32 and heber begat japhlet, and shomer, and hotham, and shua their
sister.

7:33 and the son of japhlet; pasach, and bimhal, and ashvath. these
ar the children of japhlet.

7:34 and the son of shamer; ahi, and rohgah, jehubbah, and aram.

7:35 and the son of hi brother helem; zophah, and imna, and shelesh,
and amal.

7:36 the son of zophah; suah, and harnepher, and shual, and beri, and
imrah, 7:37 bezer, and hod, and shamma, and shilshah, and ithran, and
beera.

7:38 and the son of jether; jephunneh, and pispah, and ara.

7:39 and the son of ulla; arah, and haniel, and rezia.

7:40 all these were the children of asher, head of their father's
house, choic and mighti men of valour, chief of the princes. and the
numb throughout the genealog of them that were apt to the war and
to battl wa twenti and six thousand men.

8:1 now benjamin begat bela hi firstborn, ashbel the second, and
aharah the third, 8:2 nohah the fourth, and rapha the fifth.

8:3 and the son of bela were, addar, and gera, and abihud, 8:4 and
abishua, and naaman, and ahoah, 8:5 and gera, and shephuphan, and
huram.

8:6 and these are the son of ehud: these are the head of the fathers
of the inhabit of geba, and they remov them to manahath: 8:7 and
naaman, and ahiah, and gera, he remov them, and begat uzza, and
ahihud.

8:8 and shaharaim begat children in the countri of moab, after he had
sent them away; hushim and baara were hi wives.

8:9 and he begat of hodesh hi wife, jobab, and zibia, and mesha, and
malcham, 8:10 and jeuz, and shachia, and mirma. these were hi sons,
head of the fathers.

8:11 and of hushim he begat abitub, and elpaal.

8:12 the son of elpaal; eber, and misham, and shamed, who built ono,
and lod, with the town thereof: 8:13 beriah also, and shema, who were
head of the father of the inhabit of aijalon, who drove away the
inhabit of gath: 8:14 and ahio, shashak, and jeremoth, 8:15 and
zebadiah, and arad, and ader, 8:16 and michael, and ispah, and joha,
th son of beriah; 8:17 and zebadiah, and meshullam, and hezeki, and
heber, 8:18 ishmerai also, and jezliah, and jobab, the son of elpaal;
8:19 and jakim, and zichri, and zabdi, 8:20 and elienai, and zilthai,
and eliel, 8:21 and adaiah, and beraiah, and shimrath, the son of
shimhi; 8:22 and ishpan, and heber, and eliel, 8:23 and abdon, and
zichri, and hanan, 8:24 and hananiah, and elam, and antothijah, 8:25
and iphedeiah, and penuel, the son of shashak; 8:26 and shamsherai,
and shehariah, and athaliah, 8:27 and jaresiah, and eliah, and zichri,
th son of jeroham.

8:28 these were head of the fathers, by their generations, chief men.

thes dwelt in jerusalem.

8:29 and at gibeon dwelt the father of gibeon; whose wife' name was
maachah: 8:30 and hi firstborn son abdon, and zur, and kish, and
baal, and nadab, 8:31 and gedor, and ahio, and zacher.

8:32 and mikloth begat shimeah. and these also dwelt with their
brethren in jerusalem, over against them.

8:33 and ner begat kish, and kish begat saul, and saul begat jonathan,
and malchishua, and abinadab, and eshbaal.

8:34 and the son of jonathan wa meribbaal; and meribba begat micah.

8:35 and the son of micah were, pithon, and melech, and tarea, and
ahaz.

8:36 and ahaz begat jehoadah; and jehoadah begat alemeth, and
azmaveth, and zimri; and zimri begat moza, 8:37 and moza begat binea:
rapha wa hi son, eleasah hi son, azel hi son: 8:38 and azel had
six sons, whose name are these, azrikam, bocheru, and ishmael, and
sheariah, and obadiah, and hanan. all these were the son of azel.

8:39 and the son of eshek hi brother were, ulam hi firstborn,
jehush the second, and eliphelet the third.

8:40 and the son of ulam were mighti men of valour, archers, and had
mani sons, and sons' sons, an hundr and fifty. all these are of the
son of benjamin.

9:1 So all israel were reckon by genealogies; and, behold, they were
written in the book of the king of israel and judah, who were carried
away to babylon for their transgression.

9:2 now the first inhabit that dwelt in their possess in their
citi were, the israelites, the priests, levites, and the nethinims.

9:3 and in jerusalem dwelt of the children of judah, and of the
children of benjamin, and of the children of ephraim, and manasseh;
9:4 uthai the son of ammihud, the son of omri, the son of imri, the
son of bani, of the children of pharez the son of judah.

9:5 and of the shilonites; asaiah the firstborn, and hi sons.

9:6 and of the son of zerah; jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred
and ninety.

9:7 and of the son of benjamin; sallu the son of meshullam, the son
of hodaviah, the son of hasenuah, 9:8 and ibneiah the son of jeroham,
and elah the son of uzzi, the son of michri, and meshullam the son of
shephathiah, the son of reuel, the son of ibnijah; 9:9 and their
brethren, accord to their generations, nine hundr and fifti and
six. all these men were chief of the father in the hous of their
fathers.

9:10 and of the priests; jedaiah, and jehoiarib, and jachin, 9:11 and
azariah the son of hilkiah, the son of meshullam, the son of zadok,
th son of meraioth, the son of ahitub, the ruler of the hous of god;
9:12 and adaiah the son of jeroham, the son of pashur, the son of
malchijah, and maasiai the son of adiel, the son of jahzerah, the son
of meshullam, the son of meshillemith, the son of immer; 9:13 and
their brethren, head of the hous of their fathers, a thousand and
seven hundr and threescore; veri abl men for the work of the
servic of the hous of god.

9:14 and of the levites; shemaiah the son of hasshub, the son of
azrikam, the son of hashabiah, of the son of merari; 9:15 and
bakbakkar, heresh, and galal, and mattaniah the son of micah, the son
of zichri, the son of asaph; 9:16 and obadiah the son of shemaiah, the
son of galal, the son of jeduthun, and berechiah the son of asa, the
son of elkanah, that dwelt in the villag of the netophathites.

9:17 and the porter were, shallum, and akkub, and talmon, and ahiman,
and their brethren: shallum wa the chief; 9:18 who hitherto wait in
th king' gate eastward: they were porter in the compani of the
children of levi.

9:19 and shallum the son of kore, the son of ebiasaph, the son of
korah, and hi brethren, of the hous of hi father, the korahites,
wer over the work of the service, keeper of the gate of the
tabernacle: and their fathers, be over the host of the lord, were
keep of the entry.

9:20 and phineha the son of eleazar wa the ruler over them in time
past, and the lord wa with him.

9:21 and zechariah the son of meshelemiah wa porter of the door of
th tabernacl of the congregation.

9:22 all these which were chosen to be porter in the gate were two
hundr and twelve. these were reckon by their genealog in their
villages, whom david and samuel the seer did ordain in their set
office.

9:23 So they and their children had the oversight of the gate of the
hous of the lord, namely, the hous of the tabernacle, by wards.

9:24 In four quarter were the porters, toward the east, west, north,
and south.

9:25 and their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come
aft seven day from time to time with them.

9:26 for these levites, the four chief porters, were in their set
office, and were over the chamber and treasuri of the hous of god.

9:27 and they lodg round about the hous of god, becaus the charge
wa upon them, and the open thereof everi morn pertain to
them.

9:28 and certain of them had the charg of the minist vessels,
that they should bring them in and out by tale.

9:29 some of them also were appoint to overse the vessels, and all
th instrument of the sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine,
and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.

9:30 and some of the son of the priest made the ointment of the
spices.

9:31 and mattithiah, one of the levites, who wa the firstborn of
shallum the korahite, had the set offic over the thing that were
mad in the pans.

9:32 and other of their brethren, of the son of the kohathites, were
ov the shewbread, to prepar it everi sabbath.

9:33 and these are the singers, chief of the father of the levites,
who remain in the chamber were free: for they were employ in
that work day and night.

9:34 these chief father of the levit were chief throughout their
generations; these dwelt at jerusalem.

9:35 and in gibeon dwelt the father of gibeon, jehiel, whose wife's
nam wa maachah: 9:36 and hi firstborn son abdon, then zur, and
kish, and baal, and ner, and nadab.

9:37 and gedor, and ahio, and zechariah, and mikloth.

9:38 and mikloth begat shimeam. and they also dwelt with their
brethren at jerusalem, over against their brethren.

9:39 and ner begat kish; and kish begat saul; and saul begat jonathan,
and malchishua, and abinadab, and eshbaal.

9:40 and the son of jonathan wa meribbaal: and meribba begat micah.

9:41 and the son of micah were, pithon, and melech, and tahrea, and
ahaz.

9:42 and ahaz begat jarah; and jarah begat alemeth, and azmaveth, and
zimri; and zimri begat moza; 9:43 and moza begat binea; and rephaiah
hi son, eleasah hi son, azel hi son.

9:44 and azel had six sons, whose name are these, azrikam, bocheru,
and ishmael, and sheariah, and obadiah, and hanan: these were the sons
of azel.

10:1 now the philistin fought against israel; and the men of israel
fl from befor the philistines, and fell down slain in mount gilboa.

10:2 and the philistin follow hard after saul, and after hi sons;
and the philistin slew jonathan, and abinadab, and malchishua, the
son of saul.

10:3 and the battl went sore against saul, and the archer hit him,
and he wa wound of the archers.

10:4 then said saul to hi armourbearer, draw thi sword, and thrust me
through therewith; lest these uncircumcis come and abus me. but his
armourbear would not; for he wa sore afraid. So saul took a sword,
and fell upon it.

10:5 and when hi armourbear saw that saul wa dead, he fell
likewis on the sword, and died.

10:6 So saul died, and hi three sons, and all hi hous died
together.

10:7 and when all the men of israel that were in the valley saw that
they fled, and that saul and hi son were dead, then they forsook
their cities, and fled: and the philistin came and dwelt in them.

10:8 and it came to pass on the morrow, when the philistin came to
strip the slain, that they found saul and hi son fallen in mount
gilboa.

10:9 and when they had strip him, they took hi head, and his
armour, and sent into the land of the philistin round about, to
carri tide unto their idols, and to the people.

10:10 and they put hi armour in the hous of their gods, and fastened
hi head in the templ of dagon.

10:11 and when all jabeshgilead heard all that the philistin had
don to saul, 10:12 they arose, all the valiant men, and took away the
bodi of saul, and the bodi of hi sons, and brought them to jabesh,
and buri their bone under the oak in jabesh, and fast seven days.

10:13 So saul die for hi transgress which he commit against
th lord, even against the word of the lord, which he kept not, and
also for ask counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire
of it; 10:14 and enquir not of the lord: therefor he slew him, and
turn the kingdom unto david the son of jesse.

11:1 then all israel gather themselv to david unto hebron, saying,
behold, we are thi bone and thi flesh.

11:2 and moreov in time past, even when saul wa king, thou wast he
that leddest out and broughtest in israel: and the lord thi god said
unto thee, thou shalt feed my peopl israel, and thou shalt be ruler
ov my peopl israel.

11:3 therefor came all the elder of israel to the king to hebron;
and david made a coven with them in hebron befor the lord; and
they anoint david king over israel, accord to the word of the
lord by samuel.

11:4 and david and all israel went to jerusalem, which is jebus; where
th jebusit were, the inhabit of the land.

11:5 and the inhabit of jebu said to david, thou shalt not come
hither. nevertheless david took the castl of zion, which is the city
of david.

11:6 and david said, whosoev smiteth the jebusit first shall be
chief and captain. So joab the son of zeruiah went first up, and was
chief.

11:7 and david dwelt in the castle; therefor they call it the city
of david.

11:8 and he built the citi round about, even from millo round about:
and joab repair the rest of the city.

11:9 So david wax greater and greater: for the lord of host was
with him.

11:10 these also are the chief of the mighti men whom david had, who
strengthen themselv with him in hi kingdom, and with all israel,
to make him king, accord to the word of the lord concern israel.

11:11 and thi is the number of the mighti men whom david had;
jashobeam, an hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lift up his
spear against three hundr slain by him at one time.

11:12 and after him wa eleazar the son of dodo, the ahohite, who was
on of the three mighties.

11:13 He wa with david at pasdammim, and there the philistin were
gath togeth to battle, where wa a parcel of ground full of
barley; and the peopl fled from befor the philistines.

11:14 and they set themselv in the midst of that parcel, and
deliv it, and slew the philistines; and the lord save them by a
great deliverance.

11:15 now three of the thirti captain went down to the rock to david,
into the cave of adullam; and the host of the philistin encamp in
th valley of rephaim.

11:16 and david wa then in the hold, and the philistines' garrison
wa then at bethlehem.

11:17 and david longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of
th water of the well of bethlehem, that is at the gate!  11:18 and
th three brake through the host of the philistines, and drew water
out of the well of bethlehem, that wa by the gate, and took it, and
brought it to david: but david would not drink of it, but pour it
out to the lord.

11:19 and said, My god forbid it me, that I should do thi thing:
shal I drink the blood of these men that have put their live in
jeopardy? for with the jeopardi of their live they brought it.
therefor he would not drink it.

thes thing did these three mightiest.

11:20 and abishai the brother of joab, he wa chief of the three: for
lift up hi spear against three hundred, he slew them, and had a
nam among the three.

11:21 Of the three, he wa more honour than the two; for he was
their captain: howbeit he attain not to the first three.

11:22 benaiah the son of jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of
kabzeel, who had done mani acts; he slew two lionlik men of moab:
also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowi day.

11:23 and he slew an egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits
high; and in the egyptian' hand wa a spear like a weaver' beam; and
h went down to him with a staff, and pluck the spear out of the
egyptian' hand, and slew him with hi own spear.

11:24 these thing did benaiah the son of jehoiada, and had the name
among the three mighties.

11:25 behold, he wa honour among the thirty, but attain not to
th first three: and david set him over hi guard.

11:26 also the valiant men of the armi were, asahel the brother of
joab, elhanan the son of dodo of bethlehem, 11:27 shammoth the
harorite, helez the pelonite, 11:28 ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite,
abiez the antothite, 11:29 sibbecai the hushathite, ilai the
ahohite, 11:30 maharai the netophathite, hele the son of baanah the
netophathite, 11:31 ithai the son of ribai of gibeah, that pertained
to the children of benjamin, benaiah the pirathonite, 11:32 hurai of
th brook of gaash, abiel the arbathite, 11:33 azmaveth the
baharumite, eliahba the shaalbonite, 11:34 the son of hashem the
gizonite, jonathan the son of shage the hararite, 11:35 ahiam the son
of sacar the hararite, eliph the son of ur, 11:36 hepher the
mecherathite, ahijah the pelonite, 11:37 hezro the carmelite, naarai
th son of ezbai, 11:38 joel the brother of nathan, mibhar the son of
haggeri, 11:39 zelek the ammonite, naharai the berothite, the
armourbear of joab the son of zeruiah, 11:40 ira the ithrite, gareb
th ithrite, 11:41 uriah the hittite, zabad the son of ahlai, 11:42
adina the son of shiza the reubenite, a captain of the reubenites, and
thirti with him, 11:43 hanan the son of maachah, and joshaphat the
mithnite, 11:44 uzzia the ashterathite, shama and jehiel the son of
hothan the aroerite, 11:45 jediael the son of shimri, and joha his
brother, the tizite, 11:46 eliel the mahavite, and jeribai, and
joshaviah, the son of elnaam, and ithmah the moabite, 11:47 eliel,
and obed, and jasiel the mesobaite.

12:1 now these are they that came to david to ziklag, while he yet
kept himself close becaus of saul the son of kish: and they were
among the mighti men, helper of the war.

12:2 they were arm with bows, and could use both the right hand and
th left in hurl stone and shoot arrow out of a bow, even of
saul' brethren of benjamin.

12:3 the chief wa ahiezer, then joash, the son of shemaah the
gibeathite; and jeziel, and pelet, the son of azmaveth; and berachah,
and jehu the antothite.

12:4 and ismaiah the gibeonite, a mighti man among the thirty, and
ov the thirty; and jeremiah, and jahaziel, and johanan, and josabad
th gederathite, 12:5 eluzai, and jerimoth, and bealiah, and
shemariah, and shephatiah the haruphite, 12:6 elkanah, and jesiah, and
azareel, and joezer, and jashobeam, the korhites, 12:7 and joelah, and
zebadiah, the son of jeroham of gedor.

12:8 and of the gadit there separ themselv unto david into the
hold to the wilder men of might, and men of war fit for the
battle, that could handl shield and buckler, whose face were like
th face of lions, and were as swift as the roe upon the mountains;
12:9 ezer the first, obadiah the second, eliab the third, 12:10
mishmannah the fourth, jeremiah the fifth, 12:11 attai the sixth,
eliel the seventh, 12:12 johanan the eighth, elzabad the ninth, 12:13
jeremiah the tenth, machbanai the eleventh.

12:14 these were of the son of gad, captain of the host: one of the
least wa over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand.

12:15 these are they that went over jordan in the first month, when it
had overflown all hi banks; and they put to flight all them of the
valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.

12:16 and there came of the children of benjamin and judah to the hold
unto david.

12:17 and david went out to meet them, and answer and said unto
them, If ye be come peaceabl unto me to help me, mine heart shall be
knit unto you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing
ther is no wrong in mine hands, the god of our father look thereon,
and rebuk it.

12:18 then the spirit came upon amasai, who wa chief of the captains,
and he said, thine are we, david, and on thi side, thou son of jesse:
peace, peac be unto thee, and peac be to thine helpers; for thi god
helpeth thee.

then david receiv them, and made them captain of the band.

12:19 and there fell some of manasseh to david, when he came with the
philistin against saul to battle: but they help them not: for the
lord of the philistin upon advis sent him away, saying, he
wil fall to hi master saul to the jeopardi of our heads.

12:20 As he went to ziklag, there fell to him of manasseh, adnah, and
jozabad, and jediael, and michael, and jozabad, and elihu, and
zilthai, captain of the thousand that were of manasseh.

12:21 and they help david against the band of the rovers: for they
wer all mighti men of valour, and were captain in the host.

12:22 for at that time day by day there came to david to help him,
until it wa a great host, like the host of god.

12:23 and these are the number of the band that were readi arm to
th war, and came to david to hebron, to turn the kingdom of saul to
him, accord to the word of the lord.

12:24 the children of judah that bare shield and spear were six
thousand and eight hundred, readi arm to the war.

12:25 Of the children of simeon, mighti men of valour for the war,
seven thousand and one hundred.

12:26 Of the children of levi four thousand and six hundred.

12:27 and jehoiada wa the leader of the aaronites, and with him were
thre thousand and seven hundred; 12:28 and zadok, a young man mighty
of valour, and of hi father' hous twenti and two captains.

12:29 and of the children of benjamin, the kindr of saul, three
thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of
th hous of saul.

12:30 and of the children of ephraim twenti thousand and eight
hundred, mighti men of valour, famou throughout the hous of their
fathers.

12:31 and of the half tribe of manasseh eighteen thousand, which were
express by name, to come and make david king.

12:32 and of the children of issachar, which were men that had
understand of the times, to know what israel ought to do; the heads
of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their
commandment.

12:33 Of zebulun, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, with
al instrument of war, fifti thousand, which could keep rank: they
wer not of doubl heart.

12:34 and of naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield
and spear thirti and seven thousand.

12:35 and of the danit expert in war twenti and eight thousand and
six hundred.

12:36 and of asher, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, forty
thousand.

12:37 and on the other side of jordan, of the reubenites, and the
gadites, and of the half tribe of manasseh, with all manner of
instru of war for the battle, an hundr and twenti thousand.

12:38 all these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect
heart to hebron, to make david king over all israel: and all the rest
also of israel were of one heart to make david king.

12:39 and there they were with david three days, eat and drinking:
for their brethren had prepar for them.

12:40 moreov they that were nigh them, even unto issachar and
zebulun and naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on
mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cake of figs, and bunch of
raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly: for there
wa joy in israel.

13:1 and david consult with the captain of thousand and hundreds,
and with everi leader.

13:2 and david said unto all the congreg of israel, If it seem
good unto you, and that it be of the lord our god, let us send abroad
unto our brethren everi where, that are left in all the land of
israel, and with them also to the priest and levit which are in
their citi and suburbs, that they may gather themselv unto us:
13:3 and let us bring again the ark of our god to us: for we enquired
not at it in the day of saul.

13:4 and all the congreg said that they would do so: for the
th wa right in the eye of all the people.

13:5 So david gather all israel together, from shihor of egypt even
unto the enter of hemath, to bring the ark of god from
kirjathjearim.

13:6 and david went up, and all israel, to baalah, that is, to
kirjathjearim, which belong to judah, to bring up thenc the ark of
god the lord, that dwelleth between the cherubims, whose name is
cal on it.

13:7 and they carri the ark of god in a new cart out of the hous of
abinadab: and uzza and ahio drave the cart.

13:8 and david and all israel play befor god with all their might,
and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with
timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.

13:9 and when they came unto the threshingfloor of chidon, uzza put
forth hi hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.

13:10 and the anger of the lord wa kindl against uzza, and he smote
him, becaus he put hi hand to the ark: and there he die befor god.

13:11 and david wa displeased, becaus the lord had made a breach
upon uzza: wherefor that place is call perezuzza to thi day.

13:12 and david wa afraid of god that day, saying, how shall I bring
th ark of god home to me?  13:13 So david brought not the ark home to
himself to the citi of david, but carri it asid into the hous of
obededom the gittite.

13:14 and the ark of god remain with the famili of obededom in his
hous three months. and the lord bless the hous of obededom, and
al that he had.

14:1 now hiram king of tyre sent messeng to david, and timber of
cedars, with mason and carpenters, to build him an house.

14:2 and david perceiv that the lord had confirm him king over
israel, for hi kingdom wa lift up on high, becaus of hi people
israel.

14:3 and david took more wive at jerusalem: and david begat more sons
and daughters.

14:4 now these are the name of hi children which he had in
jerusalem; shammua, and shobab, nathan, and solomon, 14:5 and ibhar,
and elishua, and elpalet, 14:6 and nogah, and nepheg, and japhia, 14:7
and elishama, and beeliada, and eliphalet.

14:8 and when the philistin heard that david wa anoint king over
al israel, all the philistin went up to seek david. and david heard
of it, and went out against them.

14:9 and the philistin came and spread themselv in the valley of
rephaim.

14:10 and david enquir of god, saying, shall I go up against the
philistines? and wilt thou deliv them into mine hand? and the lord
said unto him, Go up; for I will deliv them into thine hand.

14:11 So they came up to baalperazim; and david smote them there. then
david said, god hath broken in upon mine enemi by mine hand like the
break forth of waters: therefor they call the name of that place
baalperazim.

14:12 and when they had left their god there, david gave a
commandment, and they were burn with fire.

14:13 and the philistin yet again spread themselv abroad in the
valley.

14:14 therefor david enquir again of god; and god said unto him, go
not up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over
against the mulberri trees.

14:15 and it shall be, when thou shalt hear a sound of go in the
top of the mulberri trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle: for
god is gone forth befor thee to smite the host of the philistines.

14:16 david therefor did as god command him: and they smote the
host of the philistin from gibeon even to gazer.

14:17 and the fame of david went out into all lands; and the lord
brought the fear of him upon all nations.

15:1 and david made him hous in the citi of david, and prepar a
plac for the ark of god, and pitch for it a tent.

15:2 then david said, none ought to carri the ark of god but the
levites: for them hath the lord chosen to carri the ark of god, and to
minist unto him for ever.

15:3 and david gather all israel togeth to jerusalem, to bring up
th ark of the lord unto hi place, which he had prepar for it.

15:4 and david assembl the children of aaron, and the levites: 15:5
of the son of kohath; uriel the chief, and hi brethren an hundred
and twenty: 15:6 Of the son of merari; asaiah the chief, and his
brethren two hundr and twenty: 15:7 Of the son of gershom; joel the
chief and hi brethren an hundr and thirty: 15:8 Of the son of
elizaphan; shemaiah the chief, and hi brethren two hundred: 15:9 of
th son of hebron; eliel the chief, and hi brethren fourscore: 15:10
of the son of uzziel; amminadab the chief, and hi brethren an
hundr and twelve.

15:11 and david call for zadok and abiathar the priests, and for the
levites, for uriel, asaiah, and joel, shemaiah, and eliel, and
amminadab, 15:12 and said unto them, Ye are the chief of the fathers
of the levites: sanctifi yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that
y may bring up the ark of the lord god of israel unto the place that
i have prepar for it.

15:13 for becaus ye did it not at the first, the lord our god made a
breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.

15:14 So the priest and the levit sanctifi themselv to bring up
th ark of the lord god of israel.

15:15 and the children of the levit bare the ark of god upon their
should with the stave thereon, as mose command accord to the
word of the lord.

15:16 and david spake to the chief of the levit to appoint their
brethren to be the singer with instrument of musick, psalteri and
harp and cymbals, sounding, by lift up the voic with joy.

15:17 So the levit appoint heman the son of joel; and of his
brethren, asaph the son of berechiah; and of the son of merari their
brethren, ethan the son of kushaiah; 15:18 and with them their
brethren of the second degree, zechariah, ben, and jaaziel, and
shemiramoth, and jehiel, and unni, eliab, and benaiah, and maaseiah,
and mattithiah, and elipheleh, and mikneiah, and obededom, and jeiel,
th porters.

15:19 So the singers, heman, asaph, and ethan, were appoint to sound
with cymbal of brass; 15:20 and zechariah, and aziel, and
shemiramoth, and jehiel, and unni, and eliab, and maaseiah, and
benaiah, with psalteri on alamoth; 15:21 and mattithiah, and
elipheleh, and mikneiah, and obededom, and jeiel, and azaziah, with
harp on the sheminith to excel.

15:22 and chenaniah, chief of the levites, wa for song: he instructed
about the song, becaus he wa skilful.

15:23 and berechiah and elkanah were doorkeep for the ark.

15:24 and shebaniah, and jehoshaphat, and nethaneel, and amasai, and
zechariah, and benaiah, and eliezer, the priests, did blow with the
trumpet befor the ark of god: and obededom and jehiah were
doorkeep for the ark.

15:25 So david, and the elder of israel, and the captain over
thousands, went to bring up the ark of the coven of the lord out of
th hous of obededom with joy.

15:26 and it came to pass, when god help the levit that bare the
ark of the coven of the lord, that they offer seven bullock and
seven rams.

15:27 and david wa cloth with a robe of fine linen, and all the
levit that bare the ark, and the singers, and chenaniah the master
of the song with the singers: david also had upon him an ephod of
linen.

15:28 thu all israel brought up the ark of the coven of the lord
with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and
with cymbals, make a nois with psalteri and harps.

15:29 and it came to pass, as the ark of the coven of the lord came
to the citi of david, that michal, the daughter of saul look out at
a window saw king david danc and playing: and she despis him in
her heart.

16:1 So they brought the ark of god, and set it in the midst of the
tent that david had pitch for it: and they offer burnt sacrifices
and peac offer befor god.

16:2 and when david had made an end of offer the burnt offerings
and the peac offerings, he bless the peopl in the name of the
lord.

16:3 and he dealt to everi one of israel, both man and woman, to every
on a loaf of bread, and a good piec of flesh, and a flagon of wine.

16:4 and he appoint certain of the levit to minist befor the
ark of the lord, and to record, and to thank and prais the lord god
of israel: 16:5 asaph the chief, and next to him zechariah, jeiel, and
shemiramoth, and jehiel, and mattithiah, and eliab, and benaiah, and
obededom: and jeiel with psalteri and with harps; but asaph made a
sound with cymbals; 16:6 benaiah also and jahaziel the priest with
trumpet continu befor the ark of the coven of god.

16:7 then on that day david deliv first thi psalm to thank the
lord into the hand of asaph and hi brethren.

16:8 give thank unto the lord, call upon hi name, make known his
de among the people.

16:9 sing unto him, sing psalm unto him, talk ye of all hi wondrous
works.

16:10 glori ye in hi holi name: let the heart of them rejoic that
seek the lord.

16:11 seek the lord and hi strength, seek hi face continually.

16:12 rememb hi marvel work that he hath done, hi wonders,
and the judgment of hi mouth; 16:13 O ye seed of israel hi servant,
y children of jacob, hi chosen ones.

16:14 He is the lord our god; hi judgment are in all the earth.

16:15 Be ye mind alway of hi covenant; the word which he
command to a thousand generations; 16:16 even of the coven which
h made with abraham, and of hi oath unto isaac; 16:17 and hath
confirm the same to jacob for a law, and to israel for an
everlast covenant, 16:18 saying, unto thee will I give the land of
canaan, the lot of your inheritance; 16:19 when ye were but few, even
a few, and stranger in it.

16:20 and when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom
to anoth people; 16:21 He suffer no man to do them wrong: yea, he
reprov king for their sakes, 16:22 saying, touch not mine anointed,
and do my prophet no harm.

16:23 sing unto the lord, all the earth; shew forth from day to day
hi salvation.

16:24 declar hi glori among the heathen; hi marvel work among
al nations.

16:25 for great is the lord, and greatli to be praised: he also is to
b fear abov all gods.

16:26 for all the god of the peopl are idols: but the lord made the
heavens.

16:27 glori and honour are in hi presence; strength and glad are
in hi place.

16:28 give unto the lord, ye kindr of the people, give unto the
lord glori and strength.

16:29 give unto the lord the glori due unto hi name: bring an
offering, and come befor him: worship the lord in the beauti of
holiness.

16:30 fear befor him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable,
that it be not moved.

16:31 let the heaven be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let men
say among the nations, the lord reigneth.

16:32 let the sea roar, and the ful thereof: let the fields
rejoice, and all that is therein.

16:33 then shall the tree of the wood sing out at the presenc of the
lord, becaus he cometh to judg the earth.

16:34 O give thank unto the lord; for he is good; for hi mercy
endureth for ever.

16:35 and say ye, save us, O god of our salvation, and gather us
together, and deliv us from the heathen, that we may give thank to
thi holi name, and glori in thi praise.

16:36 bless be the lord god of israel for ever and ever. and all the
peopl said, amen, and prais the lord.

16:37 So he left there befor the ark of the coven of the lord
asaph and hi brethren, to minist befor the ark continually, as
everi day' work required: 16:38 and obededom with their brethren,
threescor and eight; obededom also the son of jeduthun and hosah to
b porters: 16:39 and zadok the priest, and hi brethren the priests,
befor the tabernacl of the lord in the high place that wa at
gibeon, 16:40 To offer burnt offer unto the lord upon the altar of
th burnt offer continu morn and evening, and to do
accord to all that is written in the law of the lord, which he
command israel; 16:41 and with them heman and jeduthun, and the rest
that were chosen, who were express by name, to give thank to the
lord, becaus hi merci endureth for ever; 16:42 and with them heman
and jeduthun with trumpet and cymbal for those that should make a
sound, and with music instrument of god. and the son of jeduthun
wer porters.

16:43 and all the peopl depart everi man to hi house: and david
return to bless hi house.

17:1 now it came to pass, as david sat in hi house, that david said
to nathan the prophet, lo, I dwell in an hous of cedars, but the ark
of the coven of the lord remaineth under curtains.

17:2 then nathan said unto david, Do all that is in thine heart; for
god is with thee.

17:3 and it came to pass the same night, that the word of god came to
nathan, saying, 17:4 Go and tell david my servant, thu saith the
lord, thou shalt not build me an hous to dwell in: 17:5 for I have
not dwelt in an hous sinc the day that I brought up israel unto this
day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacl to
another.

17:6 wheresoev I have walk with all israel, spake I a word to any
of the judg of israel, whom I command to feed my people, saying,
whi have ye not built me an hous of cedars?  17:7 now therefor thus
shalt thou say unto my servant david, thu saith the lord of hosts, i
took thee from the sheepcote, even from follow the sheep, that thou
shouldest be ruler over my peopl israel: 17:8 and I have been with
the whithersoev thou hast walked, and have cut off all thine
enemi from befor thee, and have made thee a name like the name of
th great men that are in the earth.

17:9 also I will ordain a place for my peopl israel, and will plant
them, and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be move no more;
neith shall the children of wicked wast them ani more, as at
th beginning, 17:10 and sinc the time that I command judg to be
ov my peopl israel. moreov I will subdu all thine enemies.
furthermor I tell thee that the lord will build thee an house.

17:11 and it shall come to pass, when thi day be expir that thou
must go to be with thi fathers, that I will rais up thi seed after
thee, which shall be of thi sons; and I will establish hi kingdom.

17:12 He shall build me an house, and I will stablish hi throne for
ever.

17:13 I will be hi father, and he shall be my son: and I will not
tak my merci away from him, as I took it from him that wa before
thee: 17:14 but I will settl him in mine hous and in my kingdom for
ever: and hi throne shall be establish for evermore.

17:15 accord to all these words, and accord to all thi vision,
so did nathan speak unto david.

17:16 and david the king came and sat befor the lord, and said, who
am I, O lord god, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?  17:17 and yet thi wa a small thing in thine eyes, O god;
for thou hast also spoken of thi servant' hous for a great while to
come, and hast regard me accord to the estat of a man of high
degree, O lord god.

17:18 what can david speak more to thee for the honour of thi servant?
for thou knowest thi servant.

17:19 O lord, for thi servant' sake, and accord to thine own
heart, hast thou done all thi greatness, in make known all these
great things.

17:20 O lord, there is none like thee, neither is there ani god beside
thee, accord to all that we have heard with our ears.

17:21 and what one nation in the earth is like thi peopl israel, whom
god went to redeem to be hi own people, to make thee a name of
great and terribleness, by drive out nation from befor thy
peopl whom thou hast redeem out of egypt?  17:22 for thi people
israel didst thou make thine own peopl for ever; and thou, lord,
becamest their god.

17:23 therefor now, lord, let the thing that thou hast spoken
concern thi servant and concern hi hous be establish for
ever, and do as thou hast said.

17:24 let it even be established, that thi name may be magnifi for
ever, saying, the lord of host is the god of israel, even a god to
israel: and let the hous of david thi servant be establish before
thee.

17:25 for thou, O my god, hast told thi servant that thou wilt build
him an house: therefor thi servant hath found in hi heart to pray
befor thee.

17:26 and now, lord, thou art god, and hast promis thi goodness
unto thi servant: 17:27 now therefor let it pleas thee to bless the
hous of thi servant, that it may be befor thee for ever: for thou
blessest, O lord, and it shall be bless for ever.

18:1 now after thi it came to pass, that david smote the philistines,
and subdu them, and took gath and her town out of the hand of the
philistines.

18:2 and he smote moab; and the moabit becam david' servants, and
brought gifts.

18:3 and david smote hadarez king of zobah unto hamath, as he went
to stablish hi dominion by the river euphrates.

18:4 and david took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand
horsemen, and twenti thousand footmen: david also hough all the
chariot horses, but reserv of them an hundr chariots.

18:5 and when the syrian of damascu came to help hadarez king of
zobah, david slew of the syrian two and twenti thousand men.

18:6 then david put garrison in syriadamascus; and the syrian became
david' servants, and brought gifts. thu the lord preserv david
whithersoev he went.

18:7 and david took the shield of gold that were on the servant of
hadarezer, and brought them to jerusalem.

18:8 likewis from tibhath, and from chun, citi of hadarezer,
brought david veri much brass, wherewith solomon made the brasen sea,
and the pillars, and the vessel of brass.

18:9 now when tou king of hamath heard how david had smitten all the
host of hadarez king of zobah; 18:10 He sent hadoram hi son to king
david, to enquir of hi welfare, and to congratul him, becaus he
had fought against hadarezer, and smitten him; (for hadarez had war
with tou;) and with him all manner of vessel of gold and silver and
brass.

18:11 them also king david dedic unto the lord, with the silver
and the gold that he brought from all these nations; from edom, and
from moab, and from the children of ammon, and from the philistines,
and from amalek.

18:12 moreov abishai the son of zeruiah slew of the edomit in the
valley of salt eighteen thousand.

18:13 and he put garrison in edom; and all the edomit became
david' servants. thu the lord preserv david whithersoev he went.

18:14 So david reign over all israel, and execut judgment and
justic among all hi people.

18:15 and joab the son of zeruiah wa over the host; and jehoshaphat
th son of ahilud, recorder.

18:16 and zadok the son of ahitub, and abimelech the son of abiathar,
wer the priests; and shavsha wa scribe; 18:17 and benaiah the son of
jehoiada wa over the cherethit and the pelethites; and the son of
david were chief about the king.

19:1 now it came to pass after this, that nahash the king of the
children of ammon died, and hi son reign in hi stead.

19:2 and david said, I will shew kind unto hanun the son of
nahash, becaus hi father shew kind to me. and david sent
messeng to comfort him concern hi father. So the servant of
david came into the land of the children of ammon to hanun, to comfort
him.

19:3 but the princ of the children of ammon said to hanun, thinkest
th that david doth honour thi father, that he hath sent comforters
unto thee?  are not hi servant come unto thee for to search, and to
overthrow, and to spi out the land?  19:4 wherefor hanun took david's
servants, and shave them, and cut off their garment in the midst
hard by their buttocks, and sent them away.

19:5 then there went certain, and told david how the men were served.
and he sent to meet them: for the men were greatli ashamed. and the
k said, tarri at jericho until your beard be grown, and then
return.

19:6 and when the children of ammon saw that they had made themselves
odi to david, hanun and the children of ammon sent a thousand
tal of silver to hire them chariot and horsemen out of
mesopotamia, and out of syriamaachah, and out of zobah.

19:7 So they hire thirti and two thousand chariots, and the king of
maachah and hi people; who came and pitch befor medeba. and the
children of ammon gather themselv togeth from their cities, and
cam to battle.

19:8 and when david heard of it, he sent joab, and all the host of the
mighti men.

19:9 and the children of ammon came out, and put the battl in array
befor the gate of the city: and the king that were come were by
themselv in the field.

19:10 now when joab saw that the battl wa set against him befor and
behind, he chose out of all the choic of israel, and put them in
array against the syrians.

19:11 and the rest of the peopl he deliv unto the hand of abishai
hi brother, and they set themselv in array against the children of
ammon.

19:12 and he said, If the syrian be too strong for me, then thou
shalt help me: but if the children of ammon be too strong for thee,
then I will help thee.

19:13 Be of good courage, and let us behav ourselv valiantli for
our people, and for the citi of our god: and let the lord do that
which is good in hi sight.

19:14 So joab and the peopl that were with him drew nigh befor the
syrian unto the battle; and they fled befor him.

19:15 and when the children of ammon saw that the syrian were fled,
they likewis fled befor abishai hi brother, and enter into the
city. then joab came to jerusalem.

19:16 and when the syrian saw that they were put to the wors before
israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the syrian that were
beyond the river: and shophach the captain of the host of hadarezer
w befor them.

19:17 and it wa told david; and he gather all israel, and passed
ov jordan, and came upon them, and set the battl in array against
them. So when david had put the battl in array against the syrians,
they fought with him.

19:18 but the syrian fled befor israel; and david slew of the
syrian seven thousand men which fought in chariots, and forty
thousand footmen, and kill shophach the captain of the host.

19:19 and when the servant of hadarez saw that they were put to the
wors befor israel, they made peac with david, and becam his
servants: neither would the syrian help the children of ammon any
more.

20:1 and it came to pass, that after the year wa expired, at the time
that king go out to battle, joab led forth the power of the army, and
wast the countri of the children of ammon, and came and besieged
rabbah. but david tarri at jerusalem. and joab smote rabbah, and
destroy it.

20:2 and david took the crown of their king from off hi head, and
found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were preciou stone in
it; and it wa set upon david' head: and he brought also exceeding
much spoil out of the city.

20:3 and he brought out the peopl that were in it, and cut them with
saws, and with harrow of iron, and with axes. even so dealt david
with all the citi of the children of ammon. and david and all the
peopl return to jerusalem.

20:4 and it came to pass after this, that there aros war at gezer
with the philistines; at which time sibbechai the hushathit slew
sippai, that wa of the children of the giant: and they were subdued.

20:5 and there wa war again with the philistines; and elhanan the son
of jair slew lahmi the brother of goliath the gittite, whose spear
staff wa like a weaver' beam.

20:6 and yet again there wa war at gath, where wa a man of great
stature, whose finger and toe were four and twenty, six on each
hand, and six on each foot and he also wa the son of the giant.

20:7 but when he defi israel, jonathan the son of shimea david's
broth slew him.

20:8 these were born unto the giant in gath; and they fell by the hand
of david, and by the hand of hi servants.

21:1 and satan stood up against israel, and provok david to number
israel.

21:2 and david said to joab and to the ruler of the people, go,
numb israel from beersheba even to dan; and bring the number of them
to me, that I may know it.

21:3 and joab answered, the lord make hi peopl an hundr time so
mani more as they be: but, my lord the king, are they not all my
lord' servants?  whi then doth my lord requir thi thing? whi will
h be a caus of trespass to israel?  21:4 nevertheless the king's
word prevail against joab. wherefor joab departed, and went
throughout all israel, and came to jerusalem.

21:5 and joab gave the sum of the number of the peopl unto david. and
al they of israel were a thousand thousand and an hundr thousand
men that drew sword: and judah wa four hundr threescor and ten
thousand men that drew sword.

21:6 but levi and benjamin count he not among them: for the king's
word wa abomin to joab.

21:7 and god wa displeas with thi thing; therefor he smote
israel.

21:8 and david said unto god, I have sin greatly, becaus I have
don thi thing: but now, I beseech thee, do away the iniqu of thy
servant; for I have done veri foolishly.

21:9 and the lord spake unto gad, david' seer, saying, 21:10 Go and
tel david, saying, thu saith the lord, I offer thee three things:
choos thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.

21:11 So gad came to david, and said unto him, thu saith the lord,
choos thee 21:12 either three years' famine; or three month to be
destroy befor thi foes, while that the sword of thine enemies
overtaketh thee; or els three day the sword of the lord, even the
pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the lord destroying
throughout all the coast of israel. now therefor advis thyself what
word I shall bring again to him that sent me.

21:13 and david said unto gad, I am in a great strait: let me fall now
into the hand of the lord; for veri great are hi mercies: but let me
not fall into the hand of man.

21:14 So the lord sent pestil upon israel: and there fell of
israel seventi thousand men.

21:15 and god sent an angel unto jerusalem to destroy it: and as he
wa destroying, the lord beheld, and he repent him of the evil, and
said to the angel that destroyed, It is enough, stay now thine hand.
and the angel of the lord stood by the threshingfloor of ornan the
jebusite.

21:16 and david lift up hi eyes, and saw the angel of the lord
stand between the earth and the heaven, have a drawn sword in his
hand stretch out over jerusalem. then david and the elder of
israel, who were cloth in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.

21:17 and david said unto god, Is it not I that command the people
to be numbered? even I it is that have sin and done evil indeed;
but as for these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray
thee, O lord my god, be on me, and on my father' house; but not on
thi people, that they should be plagued.

21:18 then the angel of the lord command gad to say to david, that
david should go up, and set up an altar unto the lord in the
threshingfloor of ornan the jebusite.

21:19 and david went up at the say of gad, which he spake in the
nam of the lord.

21:20 and ornan turn back, and saw the angel; and hi four son with
him hid themselves. now ornan wa thresh wheat.

21:21 and as david came to ornan, ornan look and saw david, and went
out of the threshingfloor, and bow himself to david with hi face to
th ground.

21:22 then david said to ornan, grant me the place of this
threshingfloor, that I may build an altar therein unto the lord: thou
shalt grant it me for the full price: that the plagu may be stayed
from the people.

21:23 and ornan said unto david, take it to thee, and let my lord the
k do that which is good in hi eyes: lo, I give thee the oxen also
for burnt offerings, and the thresh instrument for wood, and the
wheat for the meat offering; I give it all.

21:24 and king david said to ornan, nay; but I will verili buy it for
th full price: for I will not take that which is thine for the lord,
nor offer burnt offer without cost.

21:25 So david gave to ornan for the place six hundr shekel of gold
bi weight.

21:26 and david built there an altar unto the lord, and offer burnt
off and peac offerings, and call upon the lord; and he
answ him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.

21:27 and the lord command the angel; and he put up hi sword again
into the sheath thereof.

21:28 At that time when david saw that the lord had answer him in
th threshingfloor of ornan the jebusite, then he sacrif there.

21:29 for the tabernacl of the lord, which mose made in the
wilderness, and the altar of the burnt offering, were at that season
in the high place at gibeon.

21:30 but david could not go befor it to enquir of god: for he was
afraid becaus of the sword of the angel of the lord.

22:1 then david said, thi is the hous of the lord god, and thi is
th altar of the burnt offer for israel.

22:2 and david command to gather togeth the stranger that were in
th land of israel; and he set mason to hew wrought stone to build
th hous of god.

22:3 and david prepar iron in abund for the nail for the doors
of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abund without
weight; 22:4 also cedar tree in abundance: for the zidonian and they
of tyre brought much cedar wood to david.

22:5 and david said, solomon my son is young and tender, and the house
that is to be build for the lord must be exceed magnifical, of
fam and of glori throughout all countries: I will therefor now make
prepar for it. So david prepar abundantli befor hi death.

22:6 then he call for solomon hi son, and charg him to build an
hous for the lord god of israel.

22:7 and david said to solomon, My son, as for me, it wa in my mind
to build an hous unto the name of the lord my god: 22:8 but the word
of the lord came to me, saying, thou hast shed blood abundantly, and
hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an hous unto my name,
becaus thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.

22:9 behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest;
and I will give him rest from all hi enemi round about: for his
nam shall be solomon, and I will give peac and quiet unto israel
in hi days.

22:10 He shall build an hous for my name; and he shall be my son, and
i will be hi father; and I will establish the throne of hi kingdom
ov israel for ever.

22:11 now, my son, the lord be with thee; and prosper thou, and build
th hous of the lord thi god, as he hath said of thee.

22:12 onli the lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee
charg concern israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the lord
thi god.

22:13 then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the
statut and judgment which the lord charg mose with concerning
israel: be strong, and of good courage; dread not, nor be dismayed.

22:14 now, behold, in my troubl I have prepar for the hous of the
lord an hundr thousand talent of gold, and a thousand thousand
tal of silver; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in
abundance: timber also and stone have I prepared; and thou mayest add
thereto.

22:15 moreov there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewer and
work of stone and timber, and all manner of cun men for every
mann of work.

22:16 Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is
no number. aris therefore, and be doing, and the lord be with thee.

22:17 david also command all the princ of israel to help solomon
hi son, saying, 22:18 Is not the lord your god with you? and hath he
not given you rest on everi side? for he hath given the inhabit of
th land into mine hand; and the land is subdu befor the lord, and
befor hi people.

22:19 now set your heart and your soul to seek the lord your god;
aris therefore, and build ye the sanctuari of the lord god, to bring
th ark of the coven of the lord, and the holi vessel of god, into
th hous that is to be built to the name of the lord.

23:1 So when david wa old and full of days, he made solomon hi son
k over israel.

23:2 and he gather togeth all the princ of israel, with the
priest and the levites.

23:3 now the levit were number from the age of thirti year and
upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, wa thirti and
eight thousand.

23:4 Of which, twenti and four thousand were to set forward the work
of the hous of the lord; and six thousand were offic and judges:
23:5 moreov four thousand were porters; and four thousand praised
th lord with the instrument which I made, said david, to praise
therewith.

23:6 and david divid them into cours among the son of levi,
namely, gershon, kohath, and merari.

23:7 Of the gershonit were, laadan, and shimei.

23:8 the son of laadan; the chief wa jehiel, and zetham, and joel,
three.

23:9 the son of shimei; shelomith, and haziel, and haran, three.
thes were the chief of the father of laadan.

23:10 and the son of shimei were, jahath, zina, and jeush, and
beriah.

thes four were the son of shimei.

23:11 and jahath wa the chief, and zizah the second: but jeush and
beriah had not mani sons; therefor they were in one reckoning,
accord to their father' house.

23:12 the son of kohath; amram, izhar, hebron, and uzziel, four.

23:13 the son of amram; aaron and moses: and aaron wa separated,
that he should sanctifi the most holi things, he and hi son for
ever, to burn incens befor the lord, to minist unto him, and to
bless in hi name for ever.

23:14 now concern mose the man of god, hi son were name of the
trib of levi.

23:15 the son of mose were, gershom, and eliezer.

23:16 Of the son of gershom, shebuel wa the chief.

23:17 and the son of eliez were, rehabiah the chief. and eliezer
had none other sons; but the son of rehabiah were veri many.

23:18 Of the son of izhar; shelomith the chief.

23:19 Of the son of hebron; jeriah the first, amariah the second,
jahaziel the third, and jekameam the fourth.

23:20 Of the son of uzziel; micah the first and jesiah the second.

23:21 the son of merari; mahli, and mushi. the son of mahli;
eleazar, and kish.

23:22 and eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their
brethren the son of kish took them.

23:23 the son of mushi; mahli, and eder, and jeremoth, three.

23:24 these were the son of levi after the hous of their fathers;
even the chief of the fathers, as they were count by number of names
bi their polls, that did the work for the servic of the hous of the
lord, from the age of twenti year and upward.

23:25 for david said, the lord god of israel hath given rest unto his
people, that they may dwell in jerusalem for ever: 23:26 and also unto
th levites; they shall no more carri the tabernacle, nor ani vessels
of it for the servic thereof.

23:27 for by the last word of david the levit were number from
twenti year old and above: 23:28 becaus their offic wa to wait on
th son of aaron for the servic of the hous of the lord, in the
courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifi of all holi things,
and the work of the servic of the hous of god; 23:29 both for the
shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat offering, and for the
unleaven cakes, and for that which is bake in the pan, and for that
which is fried, and for all manner of measur and size; 23:30 and to
stand everi morn to thank and prais the lord, and likewis at
even: 23:31 and to offer all burnt sacrific unto the lord in the
sabbaths, in the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number,
accord to the order command unto them, continu befor the
lord: 23:32 and that they should keep the charg of the tabernacl of
th congregation, and the charg of the holi place, and the charg of
th son of aaron their brethren, in the servic of the hous of the
lord.

24:1 now these are the divis of the son of aaron. the son of
aaron; nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

24:2 but nadab and abihu die befor their father, and had no
children: therefor eleazar and ithamar execut the priest' office.

24:3 and david distribut them, both zadok of the son of eleazar,
and ahimelech of the son of ithamar, accord to their offic in
their service.

24:4 and there were more chief men found of the son of eleazar than
of the son of ithamar, and thu were they divided. among the son of
eleazar there were sixteen chief men of the hous of their fathers,
and eight among the son of ithamar accord to the hous of their
fathers.

24:5 thu were they divid by lot, one sort with another; for the
governor of the sanctuary, and governor of the hous of god, were of
th son of eleazar, and of the son of ithamar.

24:6 and shemaiah the son of nethaneel the scribe, one of the levites,
wrot them befor the king, and the princes, and zadok the priest, and
ahimelech the son of abiathar, and befor the chief of the father of
th priest and levites: one princip household be taken for
eleazar, and one taken for ithamar.

24:7 now the first lot came forth to jehoiarib, the second to jedaiah,
24:8 the third to harim, the fourth to seorim, 24:9 the fifth to
malchijah, the sixth to mijamin, 24:10 the seventh to hakkoz, the
eighth to abijah, 24:11 the ninth to jeshuah, the tenth to shecaniah,
24:12 the eleventh to eliashib, the twelfth to jakim, 24:13 the
thirteenth to huppah, the fourteenth to jeshebeab, 24:14 the fifteenth
to bilgah, the sixteenth to immer, 24:15 the seventeenth to hezir, the
eighteenth to aphses, 24:16 the nineteenth to pethahiah, the twentieth
to jehezekel, 24:17 the one and twentieth to jachin, the two and
twentieth to gamul, 24:18 the three and twentieth to delaiah, the four
and twentieth to maaziah.

24:19 these were the order of them in their servic to come into
th hous of the lord, accord to their manner, under aaron their
father, as the lord god of israel had command him.

24:20 and the rest of the son of levi were these: Of the son of
amram; shubael: of the son of shubael; jehdeiah.

24:21 concern rehabiah: of the son of rehabiah, the first was
isshiah.

24:22 Of the izharites; shelomoth: of the son of shelomoth; jahath.

24:23 and the son of hebron; jeriah the first, amariah the second,
jahaziel the third, jekameam the fourth.

24:24 Of the son of uzziel; michah: of the son of michah; shamir.

24:25 the brother of michah wa isshiah: of the son of isshiah;
zechariah.

24:26 the son of merari were mahli and mushi: the son of jaaziah;
beno.

24:27 the son of merari by jaaziah; beno, and shoham, and zaccur, and
ibri.

24:28 Of mahli came eleazar, who had no sons.

24:29 concern kish: the son of kish wa jerahmeel.

24:30 the son also of mushi; mahli, and eder, and jerimoth. these
wer the son of the levit after the hous of their fathers.

24:31 these likewis cast lot over against their brethren the son of
aaron in the presenc of david the king, and zadok, and ahimelech, and
th chief of the father of the priest and levites, even the
princip father over against their younger brethren.

25:1 moreov david and the captain of the host separ to the
servic of the son of asaph, and of heman, and of jeduthun, who
should prophesi with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the
numb of the workmen accord to their servic was: 25:2 Of the sons
of asaph; zaccur, and joseph, and nethaniah, and asarelah, the son of
asaph under the hand of asaph, which prophesi accord to the
ord of the king.

25:3 Of jeduthun: the son of jeduthun; gedaliah, and zeri, and
jeshaiah, hashabiah, and mattithiah, six, under the hand of their
fath jeduthun, who prophesi with a harp, to give thank and to
prais the lord.

25:4 Of heman: the son of heman: bukkiah, mattaniah, uzziel, shebuel,
and jerimoth, hananiah, hanani, eliathah, giddalti, and romamtiezer,
joshbekashah, mallothi, hothir, and mahazioth: 25:5 all these were the
son of heman the king' seer in the word of god, to lift up the
horn. and god gave to heman fourteen son and three daughters.

25:6 all these were under the hand of their father for song in the
hous of the lord, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the
servic of the hous of god, accord to the king' order to asaph,
jeduthun, and heman.

25:7 So the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed
in the song of the lord, even all that were cunning, wa two hundred
fourscor and eight.

25:8 and they cast lots, ward against ward, as well the small as the
great, the teacher as the scholar.

25:9 now the first lot came forth for asaph to joseph: the second to
gedaliah, who with hi brethren and son were twelve: 25:10 the third
to zaccur, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:11 the
fourth to izri, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:12 the
fifth to nethaniah, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:13
the sixth to bukkiah, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve:
25:14 the seventh to jesharelah, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were
twelve: 25:15 the eighth to jeshaiah, he, hi sons, and hi brethren,
wer twelve: 25:16 the ninth to mattaniah, he, hi sons, and his
brethren, were twelve: 25:17 the tenth to shimei, he, hi sons, and
hi brethren, were twelve: 25:18 the eleventh to azareel, he, his
sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:19 the twelfth to hashabiah,
he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:20 the thirteenth to
shubael, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:21 the
fourteenth to mattithiah, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve:
25:22 the fifteenth to jeremoth, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were
twelve: 25:23 the sixteenth to hananiah, he, hi sons, and his
brethren, were twelve: 25:24 the seventeenth to joshbekashah, he, his
sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:25 the eighteenth to hanani,
he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:26 the nineteenth to
mallothi, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:27 the
twentieth to eliathah, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve:
25:28 the one and twentieth to hothir, he, hi sons, and hi brethren,
wer twelve: 25:29 the two and twentieth to giddalti, he, hi sons,
and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:30 the three and twentieth to
mahazioth, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were twelve: 25:31 the four
and twentieth to romamtiezer, he, hi sons, and hi brethren, were
twelve.

26:1 concern the divis of the porters: Of the korhit was
meshelemiah the son of kore, of the son of asaph.

26:2 and the son of meshelemiah were, zechariah the firstborn,
jediael the second, zebadiah the third, jathniel the fourth, 26:3 elam
th fifth, jehohanan the sixth, elioenai the seventh.

26:4 moreov the son of obededom were, shemaiah the firstborn,
jehozabad the second, joah the third, and sacar the fourth, and
nethaneel the fifth.

26:5 ammiel the sixth, issachar the seventh, peulthai the eighth: for
god bless him.

26:6 also unto shemaiah hi son were son born, that rule throughout
th hous of their father: for they were mighti men of valour.

26:7 the son of shemaiah; othni, and rephael, and obed, elzabad,
whos brethren were strong men, elihu, and semachiah.

26:8 all these of the son of obededom: they and their son and their
brethren, abl men for strength for the service, were threescor and
two of obededom.

26:9 and meshelemiah had son and brethren, strong men, eighteen.

26:10 also hosah, of the children of merari, had sons; simri the
chief, (for though he wa not the firstborn, yet hi father made him
th chief;) 26:11 hilkiah the second, tebaliah the third, zechariah
th fourth: all the son and brethren of hosah were thirteen.

26:12 among these were the divis of the porters, even among the
chief men, have ward one against another, to minist in the house
of the lord.

26:13 and they cast lots, as well the small as the great, accord to
th hous of their fathers, for everi gate.

26:14 and the lot eastward fell to shelemiah. then for zechariah his
son, a wise counsellor, they cast lots; and hi lot came out
northward.

26:15 To obededom southward; and to hi son the hous of asuppim.

26:16 To shuppim and hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate
shallecheth, by the causeway of the go up, ward against ward.

26:17 eastward were six levites, northward four a day, southward four
a day, and toward asuppim two and two.

26:18 At parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at parbar.

26:19 these are the divis of the porter among the son of kore,
and among the son of merari.

26:20 and of the levites, ahijah wa over the treasur of the house
of god, and over the treasur of the dedic things.

26:21 As concern the son of laadan; the son of the gershonite
laadan, chief fathers, even of laadan the gershonite, were jehieli.

26:22 the son of jehieli; zetham, and joel hi brother, which were
ov the treasur of the hous of the lord.

26:23 Of the amramites, and the izharites, the hebronites, and the
uzzielites: 26:24 and shebuel the son of gershom, the son of moses,
wa ruler of the treasures.

26:25 and hi brethren by eliezer; rehabiah hi son, and jeshaiah his
son, and joram hi son, and zichri hi son, and shelomith hi son.

26:26 which shelomith and hi brethren were over all the treasur of
th dedic things, which david the king, and the chief fathers, the
captain over thousand and hundreds, and the captain of the host,
had dedicated.

26:27 out of the spoil won in battl did they dedic to maintain
th hous of the lord.

26:28 and all that samuel the seer, and saul the son of kish, and
abn the son of ner, and joab the son of zeruiah, had dedicated; and
whosoev had dedic ani thing, it wa under the hand of shelomith,
and of hi brethren.

26:29 Of the izharites, chenaniah and hi son were for the outward
busi over israel, for offic and judges.

26:30 and of the hebronites, hashabiah and hi brethren, men of
valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were offic among them of
israel on thi side jordan westward in all the busi of the lord,
and in the servic of the king.

26:31 among the hebronit wa jerijah the chief, even among the
hebronites, accord to the gener of hi fathers. In the
fortieth year of the reign of david they were sought for, and there
wer found among them mighti men of valour at jazer of gilead.

26:32 and hi brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven
hundr chief fathers, whom king david made ruler over the
reubenites, the gadites, and the half tribe of manasseh, for every
matt pertain to god, and affair of the king.

27:1 now the children of israel after their number, to wit, the chief
fath and captain of thousand and hundreds, and their officers
that serv the king in ani matter of the courses, which came in and
went out month by month throughout all the month of the year, of
everi cours were twenti and four thousand.

27:2 over the first cours for the first month wa jashobeam the son
of zabdiel: and in hi cours were twenti and four thousand.

27:3 Of the children of perez wa the chief of all the captain of the
host for the first month.

27:4 and over the cours of the second month wa dodai an ahohite, and
of hi cours wa mikloth also the ruler: in hi cours likewis were
twenti and four thousand.

27:5 the third captain of the host for the third month wa benaiah the
son of jehoiada, a chief priest: and in hi cours were twenti and
four thousand.

27:6 thi is that benaiah, who wa mighti among the thirty, and above
th thirty: and in hi cours wa ammizabad hi son.

27:7 the fourth captain for the fourth month wa asahel the brother of
joab, and zebadiah hi son after him: and in hi cours were twenty
and four thousand.

27:8 the fifth captain for the fifth month wa shamhuth the izrahite:
and in hi cours were twenti and four thousand.

27:9 the sixth captain for the sixth month wa ira the son of ikkesh
th tekoite: and in hi cours were twenti and four thousand.

27:10 the seventh captain for the seventh month wa helez the
pelonite, of the children of ephraim: and in hi cours were twenty
and four thousand.

27:11 the eighth captain for the eighth month wa sibbecai the
hushathite, of the zarhites: and in hi cours were twenti and four
thousand.

27:12 the ninth captain for the ninth month wa abiez the
anetothite, of the benjamites: and in hi cours were twenti and four
thousand.

27:13 the tenth captain for the tenth month wa maharai the
netophathite, of the zarhites: and in hi cours were twenti and four
thousand.

27:14 the eleventh captain for the eleventh month wa benaiah the
pirathonite, of the children of ephraim: and in hi cours were twenty
and four thousand.

27:15 the twelfth captain for the twelfth month wa heldai the
netophathite, of othniel: and in hi cours were twenti and four
thousand.

27:16 furthermor over the tribe of israel: the ruler of the
reubenit wa eliez the son of zichri: of the simeonites,
shephatiah the son of maachah: 27:17 Of the levites, hashabiah the son
of kemuel: of the aaronites, zadok: 27:18 Of judah, elihu, one of the
brethren of david: of issachar, omri the son of michael: 27:19 of
zebulun, ishmaiah the son of obadiah: of naphtali, jerimoth the son of
azriel: 27:20 Of the children of ephraim, hoshea the son of azaziah:
of the half tribe of manasseh, joel the son of pedaiah: 27:21 Of the
half tribe of manasseh in gilead, iddo the son of zechariah: of
benjamin, jaasiel the son of abner: 27:22 Of dan, azareel the son of
jeroham. these were the princ of the tribe of israel.

27:23 but david took not the number of them from twenti year old and
under: becaus the lord had said he would increas israel like to the
star of the heavens.

27:24 joab the son of zeruiah began to number, but he finish not,
becaus there fell wrath for it against israel; neither wa the number
put in the account of the chronicl of king david.

27:25 and over the king' treasur wa azmaveth the son of adiel: and
ov the storehous in the fields, in the cities, and in the
villages, and in the castles, wa jehonathan the son of uzziah: 27:26
and over them that did the work of the field for tillag of the ground
wa ezri the son of chelub: 27:27 and over the vineyard wa shimei
th ramathite: over the increas of the vineyard for the wine cellars
wa zabdi the shiphmite: 27:28 and over the oliv tree and the
sycomor tree that were in the low plain wa baalhanan the gederite:
and over the cellar of oil wa joash: 27:29 and over the herd that
f in sharon wa shitrai the sharonite: and over the herd that were
in the valley wa shaphat the son of adlai: 27:30 over the camels
also wa obil the ishmaelite: and over the ass wa jehdeiah the
meronothite: 27:31 and over the flock wa jaziz the hagerite. all
thes were the ruler of the substanc which wa king david's.

27:32 also jonathan david' uncl wa a counsellor, a wise man, and a
scribe: and jehiel the son of hachmoni wa with the king' sons: 27:33
and ahithophel wa the king' counsellor: and hushai the archit was
th king' companion: 27:34 and after ahithophel wa jehoiada the son
of benaiah, and abiathar: and the gener of the king' armi wa joab.

28:1 and david assembl all the princ of israel, the princ of the
tribes, and the captain of the compani that minist to the king
bi course, and the captain over the thousands, and captain over the
hundreds, and the steward over all the substanc and possess of
th king, and of hi sons, with the officers, and with the mighti men,
and with all the valiant men, unto jerusalem.

28:2 then david the king stood up upon hi feet, and said, hear me, my
brethren, and my people: As for me, I had in mine heart to build an
hous of rest for the ark of the coven of the lord, and for the
footstool of our god, and had made readi for the building: 28:3 but
god said unto me, thou shalt not build an hous for my name, because
th hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

28:4 howbeit the lord god of israel chose me befor all the hous of
mi father to be king over israel for ever: for he hath chosen judah to
b the ruler; and of the hous of judah, the hous of my father; and
among the son of my father he like me to make me king over all
israel: 28:5 and of all my sons, (for the lord hath given me many
sons,) he hath chosen solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the
kingdom of the lord over israel.

28:6 and he said unto me, solomon thi son, he shall build my hous and
mi courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his
father.

28:7 moreov I will establish hi kingdom for ever, if he be constant
to do my command and my judgments, as at thi day.

28:8 now therefor in the sight of all israel the congreg of the
lord, and in the audienc of our god, keep and seek for all the
command of the lord your god: that ye may possess thi good land,
and leav it for an inherit for your children after you for ever.

28:9 and thou, solomon my son, know thou the god of thi father, and
serv him with a perfect heart and with a will mind: for the lord
searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imagin of the
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
forsak him, he will cast thee off for ever.

28:10 take heed now; for the lord hath chosen thee to build an house
for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

28:11 then david gave to solomon hi son the pattern of the porch, and
of the hous thereof, and of the treasuri thereof, and of the upper
chamb thereof, and of the inner parlour thereof, and of the place
of the merci seat, 28:12 and the pattern of all that he had by the
spirit, of the court of the hous of the lord, and of all the
chamb round about, of the treasuri of the hous of god, and of
th treasuri of the dedic things: 28:13 also for the cours of
th priest and the levites, and for all the work of the servic of
th hous of the lord, and for all the vessel of servic in the house
of the lord.

28:14 He gave of gold by weight for thing of gold, for all
instru of all manner of service; silver also for all instruments
of silver by weight, for all instrument of everi kind of service:
28:15 even the weight for the candlestick of gold, and for their
lamp of gold, by weight for everi candlestick, and for the lamps
thereof: and for the candlestick of silver by weight, both for the
candlestick, and also for the lamp thereof, accord to the use of
everi candlestick.

28:16 and by weight he gave gold for the tabl of shewbread, for
everi table; and likewis silver for the tabl of silver: 28:17 also
pur gold for the fleshhooks, and the bowls, and the cups: and for the
golden bason he gave gold by weight for everi bason; and likewise
silv by weight for everi bason of silver: 28:18 and for the altar of
incens refin gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the
chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and cover the
ark of the coven of the lord.

28:19 all this, said david, the lord made me understand in write by
hi hand upon me, even all the work of thi pattern.

28:20 and david said to solomon hi son, Be strong and of good
courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the lord god, even
mi god, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsak thee,
until thou hast finish all the work for the servic of the hous of
th lord.

28:21 and, behold, the cours of the priest and the levites, even
they shall be with thee for all the servic of the hous of god: and
ther shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship everi willing
skil man, for ani manner of service: also the princ and all the
peopl will be wholli at thi commandment.

29:1 furthermor david the king said unto all the congregation,
solomon my son, whom alon god hath chosen, is yet young and tender,
and the work is great: for the palac is not for man, but for the lord
god.

29:2 now I have prepar with all my might for the hous of my god the
gold for thing to be made of gold, and the silver for thing of
silver, and the brass for thing of brass, the iron for thing of
iron, and wood for thing of wood; onyx stones, and stone to be set,
glist stones, and of diver colours, and all manner of precious
stones, and marbl stone in abundance.

29:3 moreover, becaus I have set my affect to the hous of my god,
i have of mine own proper good, of gold and silver, which I have given
to the hous of my god, over and abov all that I have prepar for
th holi house.

29:4 even three thousand talent of gold, of the gold of ophir, and
seven thousand talent of refin silver, to overlay the wall of the
hous withal: 29:5 the gold for thing of gold, and the silver for
th of silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands
of artificers. and who then is will to consecr hi servic this
day unto the lord?  29:6 then the chief of the father and princ of
th tribe of israel and the captain of thousand and of hundreds,
with the ruler of the king' work, offer willingly, 29:7 and gave
for the servic of the hous of god of gold five thousand talent and
ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass
eighteen thousand talents, and one hundr thousand talent of iron.

29:8 and they with whom preciou stone were found gave them to the
treasur of the hous of the lord, by the hand of jehiel the
gershonite.

29:9 then the peopl rejoiced, for that they offer willingly,
becaus with perfect heart they offer willingli to the lord: and
david the king also rejoic with great joy.

29:10 wherefor david bless the lord befor all the congregation:
and david said, bless be thou, lord god of israel our father, for
ev and ever.

29:11 thine, O lord is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in
th earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O lord, and thou art exalted
a head abov all.

29:12 both rich and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all;
and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all.

29:13 now therefore, our god, we thank thee, and prais thi glorious
name.

29:14 but who am I, and what is my people, that we should be abl to
off so willingli after thi sort? for all thing come of thee, and
of thine own have we given thee.

29:15 for we are stranger befor thee, and sojourners, as were all
our fathers: our day on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

29:16 O lord our god, all thi store that we have prepar to build
the an hous for thine holi name cometh of thine hand, and is all
thin own.

29:17 I know also, my god, that thou triest the heart, and hast
pleasur in uprightness. As for me, in the upright of mine heart i
hav willingli offer all these things: and now have I seen with joy
thi people, which are present here, to offer willingli unto thee.

29:18 O lord god of abraham, isaac, and of israel, our fathers, keep
thi for ever in the imagin of the thought of the heart of thy
people, and prepar their heart unto thee: 29:19 and give unto solomon
mi son a perfect heart, to keep thi commandments, thi testimonies, and
thi statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for
th which I have made provision.

29:20 and david said to all the congregation, now bless the lord your
god.

and all the congreg bless the lord god of their fathers, and
bow down their heads, and worship the lord, and the king.

29:21 and they sacrif sacrific unto the lord, and offer burnt
off unto the lord, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand
bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink
offerings, and sacrific in abund for all israel: 29:22 and did
eat and drink befor the lord on that day with great gladness. and
they made solomon the son of david king the second time, and anointed
him unto the lord to be the chief governor, and zadok to be priest.

29:23 then solomon sat on the throne of the lord as king instead of
david hi father, and prospered; and all israel obey him.

29:24 and all the princes, and the mighti men, and all the sons
likewis of king david, submit themselv unto solomon the king.

29:25 and the lord magnifi solomon exceedingli in the sight of all
israel, and bestow upon him such royal majesti as had not been on
ani king befor him in israel.

29:26 thu david the son of jess reign over all israel.

29:27 and the time that he reign over israel wa forti years; seven
year reign he in hebron, and thirti and three year reign he in
jerusalem.

29:28 and he die in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour:
and solomon hi son reign in hi stead.

29:29 now the act of david the king, first and last, behold, they are
written in the book of samuel the seer, and in the book of nathan the
prophet, and in the book of gad the seer, 29:30 with all hi reign and
hi might, and the time that went over him, and over israel, and over
al the kingdom of the countries.




th second book of the chronicles


1:1 and solomon the son of david wa strengthen in hi kingdom, and
th lord hi god wa with him, and magnifi him exceedingly.

1:2 then solomon spake unto all israel, to the captain of thousands
and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to everi governor in all
israel, the chief of the fathers.

1:3 So solomon, and all the congreg with him, went to the high
plac that wa at gibeon; for there wa the tabernacl of the
congreg of god, which mose the servant of the lord had made in
th wilderness.

1:4 but the ark of god had david brought up from kirjathjearim to the
plac which david had prepar for it: for he had pitch a tent for
it at jerusalem.

1:5 moreov the brasen altar, that bezaleel the son of uri, the son
of hur, had made, he put befor the tabernacl of the lord: and
solomon and the congreg sought unto it.

1:6 and solomon went up thither to the brasen altar befor the lord,
which wa at the tabernacl of the congregation, and offer a
thousand burnt offer upon it.

1:7 In that night did god appear unto solomon, and said unto him, ask
what I shall give thee.

1:8 and solomon said unto god, thou hast shew great merci unto david
mi father, and hast made me to reign in hi stead.

1:9 now, O lord god, let thi promis unto david my father be
established: for thou hast made me king over a peopl like the dust of
th earth in multitude.

1:10 give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in
befor thi people: for who can judg thi thi people, that is so
great?  1:11 and god said to solomon, becaus thi wa in thine heart,
and thou hast not ask riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of
thin enemies, neither yet hast ask long life; but hast ask wisdom
and knowledg for thyself, that thou mayest judg my people, over whom
i have made thee king: 1:12 wisdom and knowledg is grant unto thee;
and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of
th king have had that have been befor thee, neither shall there any
aft thee have the like.

1:13 then solomon came from hi journey to the high place that wa at
gibeon to jerusalem, from befor the tabernacl of the congregation,
and reign over israel.

1:14 and solomon gather chariot and horsemen: and he had a thousand
and four hundr chariots, and twelv thousand horsemen, which he
plac in the chariot cities, and with the king at jerusalem.

1:15 and the king made silver and gold at jerusalem as plenteou as
stones, and cedar tree made he as the sycomor tree that are in the
val for abundance.

1:16 and solomon had hors brought out of egypt, and linen yarn: the
king' merchant receiv the linen yarn at a price.

1:17 and they fetch up, and brought forth out of egypt a chariot for
six hundr shekel of silver, and an hors for an hundr and fifty:
and so brought they out hors for all the king of the hittites, and
for the king of syria, by their means.

2:1 and solomon determin to build an hous for the name of the lord,
and an hous for hi kingdom.

2:2 and solomon told out threescor and ten thousand men to bear
burdens, and fourscor thousand to hew in the mountain, and three
thousand and six hundr to overse them.

2:3 and solomon sent to huram the king of tyre, saying, As thou didst
deal with david my father, and didst send him cedar to build him an
hous to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

2:4 behold, I build an hous to the name of the lord my god, to
ded it to him, and to burn befor him sweet incense, and for the
continu shewbread, and for the burnt offer morn and evening,
on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feast of the
lord our god. thi is an ordin for ever to israel.

2:5 and the hous which I build is great: for great is our god above
al gods.

2:6 but who is abl to build him an house, see the heaven and
heaven of heaven cannot contain him? who am I then, that I should
build him an house, save onli to burn sacrific befor him?  2:7 send
m now therefor a man cun to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can
skil to grave with the cun men that are with me in judah and in
jerusalem, whom david my father did provide.

2:8 send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of
lebanon: for I know that thi servant can skill to cut timber in
lebanon; and, behold, my servant shall be with thi servants, 2:9 even
to prepar me timber in abundance: for the hous which I am about to
build shall be wonder great.

2:10 and, behold, I will give to thi servants, the hewer that cut
timber, twenti thousand measur of beaten wheat, and twenti thousand
measur of barley, and twenti thousand bath of wine, and twenty
thousand bath of oil.

2:11 then huram the king of tyre answer in writing, which he sent to
solomon, becaus the lord hath love hi people, he hath made thee
k over them.

2:12 huram said moreover, bless be the lord god of israel, that made
heaven and earth, who hath given to david the king a wise son, endued
with prudenc and understanding, that might build an hous for the
lord, and an hous for hi kingdom.

2:13 and now I have sent a cun man, endu with understanding, of
huram my father's, 2:14 the son of a woman of the daughter of dan,
and hi father wa a man of tyre, skil to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in
blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave ani manner of
graving, and to find out everi devic which shall be put to him, with
thi cun men, and with the cun men of my lord david thi father.

2:15 now therefor the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine,
which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto hi servants: 2:16 and
w will cut wood out of lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we
wil bring it to thee in float by sea to joppa; and thou shalt carry
it up to jerusalem.

2:17 and solomon number all the stranger that were in the land of
israel, after the number wherewith david hi father had numbered
them; and they were found an hundr and fifti thousand and three
thousand and six hundred.

2:18 and he set threescor and ten thousand of them to be bearer of
burdens, and fourscor thousand to be hewer in the mountain, and
thre thousand and six hundr overs to set the peopl a work.

3:1 then solomon began to build the hous of the lord at jerusalem in
mount moriah, where the lord appear unto david hi father, in the
plac that david had prepar in the threshingfloor of ornan the
jebusite.

3:2 and he began to build in the second day of the second month, in
th fourth year of hi reign.

3:3 now these are the thing wherein solomon wa instruct for the
build of the hous of god. the length by cubit after the first
measur wa threescor cubits, and the breadth twenti cubits.

3:4 and the porch that wa in the front of the house, the length of it
wa accord to the breadth of the house, twenti cubits, and the
height wa an hundr and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure
gold.

3:5 and the greater hous he ciel with fir tree, which he overlaid
with fine gold, and set thereon palm tree and chains.

3:6 and he garnish the hous with preciou stone for beauty: and
th gold wa gold of parvaim.

3:7 He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls
thereof, and the door thereof, with gold; and grave cherubim on the
walls.

3:8 and he made the most holi house, the length whereof wa according
to the breadth of the house, twenti cubits, and the breadth thereof
twenti cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amount to six
hundr talents.

3:9 and the weight of the nail wa fifti shekel of gold. and he
overlaid the upper chamber with gold.

3:10 and in the most holi hous he made two cherubim of imag work,
and overlaid them with gold.

3:11 and the wing of the cherubim were twenti cubit long: one wing
of the one cherub wa five cubits, reach to the wall of the house:
and the other wing wa likewis five cubits, reach to the wing of
th other cherub.

3:12 and one wing of the other cherub wa five cubits, reach to the
wal of the house: and the other wing wa five cubit also, join to
th wing of the other cherub.

3:13 the wing of these cherubim spread themselv forth twenty
cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their face were inward.

3:14 and he made the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine
linen, and wrought cherubim thereon.

3:15 also he made befor the hous two pillar of thirti and five
cubit high, and the chapit that wa on the top of each of them was
fiv cubits.

3:16 and he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads
of the pillars; and made an hundr pomegranates, and put them on the
chains.

3:17 and he rear up the pillar befor the temple, one on the right
hand, and the other on the left; and call the name of that on the
right hand jachin, and the name of that on the left boaz.

4:1 moreov he made an altar of brass, twenti cubit the length
thereof, and twenti cubit the breadth thereof, and ten cubit the
height thereof.

4:2 also he made a molten sea of ten cubit from brim to brim, round
in compass, and five cubit the height thereof; and a line of thirty
cubit did compass it round about.

4:3 and under it wa the similitud of oxen, which did compass it
round about: ten in a cubit, compass the sea round about. two rows
of oxen were cast, when it wa cast.

4:4 It stood upon twelv oxen, three look toward the north, and
thre look toward the west, and three look toward the south, and
thre look toward the east: and the sea wa set abov upon them,
and all their hinder part were inward.

4:5 and the thick of it wa an handbreadth, and the brim of it
lik the work of the brim of a cup, with flower of lilies; and it
receiv and held three thousand baths.

4:6 He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five
on the left, to wash in them: such thing as they offer for the
burnt offer they wash in them; but the sea wa for the priest to
wash in.

4:7 and he made ten candlestick of gold accord to their form, and
set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.

4:8 He made also ten tables, and place them in the temple, five on
th right side, and five on the left. and he made an hundr bason of
gold.

4:9 furthermor he made the court of the priests, and the great court,
and door for the court, and overlaid the door of them with brass.

4:10 and he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over
against the south.

4:11 and huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. and
huram finish the work that he wa to make for king solomon for the
hous of god; 4:12 To wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the
chapit which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two
wreath to cover the two pommel of the chapit which were on the
top of the pillars; 4:13 and four hundr pomegran on the two
wreaths; two row of pomegran on each wreath, to cover the two
pommel of the chapit which were upon the pillars.

4:14 He made also bases, and laver made he upon the bases; 4:15 one
sea, and twelv oxen under it.

4:16 the pot also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their
instruments, did huram hi father make to king solomon for the house
of the lord of bright brass.

4:17 In the plain of jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
between succoth and zeredathah.

4:18 thu solomon made all these vessel in great abundance: for the
weight of the brass could not be found out.

4:19 and solomon made all the vessel that were for the hous of god,
th golden altar also, and the tabl whereon the shewbread wa set;
4:20 moreov the candlestick with their lamps, that they should burn
aft the manner befor the oracle, of pure gold; 4:21 and the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that
perfect gold; 4:22 and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons,
and the censers, of pure gold: and the entri of the house, the inner
door thereof for the most holi place, and the door of the hous of
th temple, were of gold.

5:1 thu all the work that solomon made for the hous of the lord was
finished: and solomon brought in all the thing that david hi father
had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments,
put he among the treasur of the hous of god.

5:2 then solomon assembl the elder of israel, and all the head of
th tribes, the chief of the father of the children of israel, unto
jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the coven of the lord out of the
citi of david, which is zion.

5:3 wherefor all the men of israel assembl themselv unto the king
in the feast which wa in the seventh month.

5:4 and all the elder of israel came; and the levit took up the
ark.

5:5 and they brought up the ark, and the tabernacl of the
congregation, and all the holi vessel that were in the tabernacle,
thes did the priest and the levit bring up.

5:6 also king solomon, and all the congreg of israel that were
assembl unto him befor the ark, sacrif sheep and oxen, which
could not be told nor number for multitude.

5:7 and the priest brought in the ark of the coven of the lord
unto hi place, to the oracl of the house, into the most holi place,
even under the wing of the cherubims: 5:8 for the cherubim spread
forth their wing over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered
th ark and the stave thereof above.

5:9 and they drew out the stave of the ark, that the end of the
stav were seen from the ark befor the oracle; but they were not
seen without. and there it is unto thi day.

5:10 there wa noth in the ark save the two tabl which mose put
therein at horeb, when the lord made a coven with the children of
israel, when they came out of egypt.

5:11 and it came to pass, when the priest were come out of the holy
place: (for all the priest that were present were sanctified, and did
not then wait by course: 5:12 also the levit which were the singers,
al of them of asaph, of heman, of jeduthun, with their son and their
brethren, be array in white linen, have cymbal and psalteries
and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them an
hundr and twenti priest sound with trumpets:) 5:13 It came even
to pass, as the trumpet and singer were as one, to make one sound
to be heard in prais and thank the lord; and when they lift up
their voic with the trumpet and cymbal and instrument of musick,
and prais the lord, saying, for he is good; for hi merci endureth
for ever: that then the hous wa fill with a cloud, even the house
of the lord; 5:14 So that the priest could not stand to minist by
reason of the cloud: for the glori of the lord had fill the hous of
god.

6:1 then said solomon, the lord hath said that he would dwell in the
thick darkness.

6:2 but I have built an hous of habit for thee, and a place for
thi dwell for ever.

6:3 and the king turn hi face, and bless the whole congregation
of israel: and all the congreg of israel stood.

6:4 and he said, bless be the lord god of israel, who hath with his
hand fulfil that which he spake with hi mouth to my father david,
saying, 6:5 sinc the day that I brought forth my peopl out of the
land of egypt I chose no citi among all the tribe of israel to build
an hous in, that my name might be there; neither chose I ani man to
b a ruler over my peopl israel: 6:6 but I have chosen jerusalem,
that my name might be there; and have chosen david to be over my
peopl israel.

6:7 now it wa in the heart of david my father to build an hous for
th name of the lord god of israel.

6:8 but the lord said to david my father, forasmuch as it wa in thine
heart to build an hous for my name, thou didst well in that it wa in
thin heart: 6:9 notwithstand thou shalt not build the house; but
thi son which shall come forth out of thi loins, he shall build the
hous for my name.

6:10 the lord therefor hath perform hi word that he hath spoken:
for I am risen up in the room of david my father, and am set on the
thron of israel, as the lord promised, and have built the hous for
th name of the lord god of israel.

6:11 and in it have I put the ark, wherein is the coven of the
lord, that he made with the children of israel.

6:12 and he stood befor the altar of the lord in the presenc of all
th congreg of israel, and spread forth hi hands: 6:13 for
solomon had made a brasen scaffold of five cubit long, and five
cubit broad, and three cubit high, and had set it in the midst of
th court: and upon it he stood, and kneel down upon hi knees
befor all the congreg of israel, and spread forth hi hands
toward heaven.

6:14 and said, O lord god of israel, there is no god like thee in the
heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy
unto thi servants, that walk befor thee with all their hearts: 6:15
thou which hast kept with thi servant david my father that which thou
hast promis him; and spakest with thi mouth, and hast fulfil it
with thine hand, as it is thi day.

6:16 now therefore, O lord god of israel, keep with thi servant david
mi father that which thou hast promis him, saying, there shall not
fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of israel; yet so
that thi children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou
hast walk befor me.

6:17 now then, O lord god of israel, let thi word be verified, which
thou hast spoken unto thi servant david.

6:18 but will god in veri deed dwell with men on the earth? behold,
heaven and the heaven of heaven cannot contain thee; how much less
thi hous which I have built!  6:19 have respect therefor to the
pray of thi servant, and to hi supplication, O lord my god, to
hearken unto the cri and the prayer which thi servant prayeth before
thee: 6:20 that thine eye may be open upon thi hous day and night,
upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thi name
there; to hearken unto the prayer which thi servant prayeth toward
thi place.

6:21 hearken therefor unto the supplic of thi servant, and of
thi peopl israel, which they shall make toward thi place: hear thou
from thi dwell place, even from heaven; and when thou hearest,
forgive.

6:22 If a man sin against hi neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him
to make him swear, and the oath come befor thine altar in thi house;
6:23 then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judg thi servants, by
requit the wicked, by recompens hi way upon hi own head; and
bi justifi the righteous, by give him accord to his
righteousness.

6:24 and if thi peopl israel be put to the wors befor the enemy,
becaus they have sin against thee; and shall return and confess
thi name, and pray and make supplic befor thee in thi house;
6:25 then hear thou from the heavens, and forgiv the sin of thy
peopl israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to
them and to their fathers.

6:26 when the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, becaus they
hav sin against thee; yet if they pray toward thi place, and
confess thi name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict
them; 6:27 then hear thou from heaven, and forgiv the sin of thy
servants, and of thi peopl israel, when thou hast taught them the
good way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thi land, which
thou hast given unto thi peopl for an inheritance.

6:28 If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there
b blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies
besieg them in the citi of their land; whatsoev sore or
whatsoev sick there be: 6:29 then what prayer or what
suppl soever shall be made of ani man, or of all thi people
israel, when everi one shall know hi own sore and hi own grief, and
shal spread forth hi hand in thi house: 6:30 then hear thou from
heaven thi dwell place, and forgive, and render unto everi man
accord unto all hi ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only
knowest the heart of the children of men:) 6:31 that they may fear
thee, to walk in thi ways, so long as they live in the land which thou
gavest unto our fathers.

6:32 moreov concern the stranger, which is not of thi people
israel, but is come from a far countri for thi great name' sake, and
thi mighti hand, and thi stretch out arm; if they come and pray in
thi house; 6:33 then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy
dwel place, and do accord to all that the stranger calleth to
the for; that all peopl of the earth may know thi name, and fear
thee, as doth thi peopl israel, and may know that thi hous which i
hav built is call by thi name.

6:34 If thi peopl go out to war against their enemi by the way that
thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward thi citi which
thou hast chosen, and the hous which I have built for thi name; 6:35
then hear thou from the heaven their prayer and their supplication,
and maintain their cause.

6:36 If they sin against thee, (for there is no man which sinneth
not,) and thou be angri with them, and deliv them over befor their
enemies, and they carri them away captiv unto a land far off or
near; 6:37 yet if they bethink themselv in the land whither they are
carri captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their
captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt
wickedly; 6:38 If they return to thee with all their heart and with
al their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have
carri them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest
unto their fathers, and toward the citi which thou hast chosen, and
toward the hous which I have built for thi name: 6:39 then hear thou
from the heavens, even from thi dwell place, their prayer and their
supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgiv thi peopl which
hav sin against thee.

6:40 now, my god, let, I beseech thee, thine eye be open, and let
thin ear be attent unto the prayer that is made in thi place.

6:41 now therefor arise, O lord god, into thi rest place, thou,
and the ark of thi strength: let thi priests, O lord god, be clothed
with salvation, and let thi saint rejoic in goodness.

6:42 O lord god, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember
th merci of david thi servant.

7:1 now when solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down
from heaven, and consum the burnt offer and the sacrifices; and
th glori of the lord fill the house.

7:2 and the priest could not enter into the hous of the lord,
becaus the glori of the lord had fill the lord' house.

7:3 and when all the children of israel saw how the fire came down,
and the glori of the lord upon the house, they bow themselv with
their face to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and
prais the lord, saying, for he is good; for hi merci endureth for
ever.

7:4 then the king and all the peopl offer sacrific befor the
lord.

7:5 and king solomon offer a sacrific of twenti and two thousand
oxen, and an hundr and twenti thousand sheep: so the king and all
th peopl dedic the hous of god.

7:6 and the priest wait on their offices: the levit also with
instru of musick of the lord, which david the king had made to
prais the lord, becaus hi merci endureth for ever, when david
prais by their ministry; and the priest sound trumpet before
them, and all israel stood.

7:7 moreov solomon hallow the middl of the court that wa before
th hous of the lord: for there he offer burnt offerings, and the
fat of the peac offerings, becaus the brasen altar which solomon had
mad wa not abl to receiv the burnt offerings, and the meat
offerings, and the fat.

7:8 also at the same time solomon kept the feast seven days, and all
israel with him, a veri great congregation, from the enter in of
hamath unto the river of egypt.

7:9 and in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept
th dedic of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.

7:10 and on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent
th peopl away into their tents, glad and merri in heart for the
good that the lord had shew unto david, and to solomon, and to
israel hi people.

7:11 thu solomon finish the hous of the lord, and the king's
house: and all that came into solomon' heart to make in the hous of
th lord, and in hi own house, he prosper effected.

7:12 and the lord appear to solomon by night, and said unto him, i
hav heard thi prayer, and have chosen thi place to myself for an
hous of sacrifice.

7:13 If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the
locust to devour the land, or if I send pestil among my people;
7:14 If my people, which are call by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgiv their sin, and
wil heal their land.

7:15 now mine eye shall be open, and mine ear attent unto the prayer
that is made in thi place.

7:16 for now have I chosen and sanctifi thi house, that my name may
b there for ever: and mine eye and mine heart shall be there
perpetually.

7:17 and as for thee, if thou wilt walk befor me, as david thi father
walked, and do accord to all that I have command thee, and shalt
observ my statut and my judgments; 7:18 then will I stablish the
thron of thi kingdom, accord as I have coven with david thy
father, saying, there shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in israel.

7:19 but if ye turn away, and forsak my statut and my commandments,
which I have set befor you, and shall go and serv other gods, and
worship them; 7:20 then will I pluck them up by the root out of my
land which I have given them; and thi house, which I have sanctified
for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a
proverb and a byword among all nations.

7:21 and thi house, which is high, shall be an astonish to every
on that passeth by it; so that he shall say, whi hath the lord done
thu unto thi land, and unto thi house?  7:22 and it shall be
answered, becaus they forsook the lord god of their fathers, which
brought them forth out of the land of egypt, and laid hold on other
gods, and worship them, and serv them: therefor hath he brought
al thi evil upon them.

8:1 and it came to pass at the end of twenti years, wherein solomon
had built the hous of the lord, and hi own house, 8:2 that the
citi which huram had restor to solomon, solomon built them, and
caus the children of israel to dwell there.

8:3 and solomon went to hamathzobah, and prevail against it.

8:4 and he built tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities,
which he built in hamath.

8:5 also he built bethhoron the upper, and bethhoron the nether,
fenc cities, with walls, gates, and bars; 8:6 and baalath, and all
th store citi that solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the
citi of the horsemen, and all that solomon desir to build in
jerusalem, and in lebanon, and throughout all the land of his
dominion.

8:7 As for all the peopl that were left of the hittites, and the
amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and the jebusites,
which were not of israel, 8:8 but of their children, who were left
aft them in the land, whom the children of israel consum not, them
did solomon make to pay tribut until thi day.

8:9 but of the children of israel did solomon make no servant for his
work; but they were men of war, and chief of hi captains, and
captain of hi chariot and horsemen.

8:10 and these were the chief of king solomon' officers, even two
hundr and fifty, that bare rule over the people.

8:11 and solomon brought up the daughter of pharaoh out of the citi of
david unto the hous that he had built for her: for he said, My wife
shal not dwell in the hous of david king of israel, becaus the
plac are holy, whereunto the ark of the lord hath come.

8:12 then solomon offer burnt offer unto the lord on the altar
of the lord, which he had built befor the porch, 8:13 even after a
certain rate everi day, offer accord to the command of
moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn
feasts, three time in the year, even in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

8:14 and he appointed, accord to the order of david hi father, the
cours of the priest to their service, and the levit to their
charges, to prais and minist befor the priests, as the duti of
everi day required: the porter also by their cours at everi gate:
for so had david the man of god commanded.

8:15 and they depart not from the command of the king unto the
priest and levit concern ani matter, or concern the
treasures.

8:16 now all the work of solomon wa prepar unto the day of the
found of the hous of the lord, and until it wa finished. So the
hous of the lord wa perfected.

8:17 then went solomon to eziongeber, and to eloth, at the sea side in
th land of edom.

8:18 and huram sent him by the hand of hi servant ships, and
serv that had knowledg of the sea; and they went with the
serv of solomon to ophir, and took thenc four hundr and fifty
tal of gold, and brought them to king solomon.

9:1 and when the queen of sheba heard of the fame of solomon, she came
to prove solomon with hard question at jerusalem, with a veri great
company, and camel that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and
preci stones: and when she wa come to solomon, she commun with
him of all that wa in her heart.

9:2 and solomon told her all her questions: and there wa noth hid
from solomon which he told her not.

9:3 and when the queen of sheba had seen the wisdom of solomon, and
th hous that he had built, 9:4 and the meat of hi table, and the
sit of hi servants, and the attend of hi ministers, and
their apparel; hi cupbear also, and their apparel; and hi ascent
bi which he went up into the hous of the lord; there wa no more
spirit in her.

9:5 and she said to the king, It wa a true report which I heard in
min own land of thine acts, and of thi wisdom: 9:6 howbeit I believed
not their words, until I came, and mine eye had seen it: and, behold,
th one half of the great of thi wisdom wa not told me: for thou
exceedest the fame that I heard.

9:7 happi are thi men, and happi are these thi servants, which stand
continu befor thee, and hear thi wisdom.

9:8 bless be the lord thi god, which delight in thee to set thee
on hi throne, to be king for the lord thi god: becaus thi god loved
israel, to establish them for ever, therefor made he thee king over
them, to do judgment and justice.

9:9 and she gave the king an hundr and twenti talent of gold, and
of spice great abundance, and preciou stones: neither wa there any
such spice as the queen of sheba gave king solomon.

9:10 and the servant also of huram, and the servant of solomon,
which brought gold from ophir, brought algum tree and precious
stones.

9:11 and the king made of the algum tree terrac to the hous of the
lord, and to the king' palace, and harp and psalteri for singers:
and there were none such seen befor in the land of judah.

9:12 and king solomon gave to the queen of sheba all her desire,
whatsoev she asked, besid that which she had brought unto the king.
so she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.

9:13 now the weight of gold that came to solomon in one year wa six
hundr and threescor and six talent of gold; 9:14 besid that which
chapmen and merchant brought. and all the king of arabia and
governor of the countri brought gold and silver to solomon.

9:15 and king solomon made two hundr target of beaten gold: six
hundr shekel of beaten gold went to one target.

9:16 and three hundr shield made he of beaten gold: three hundred
shekel of gold went to one shield. and the king put them in the house
of the forest of lebanon.

9:17 moreov the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it
with pure gold.

9:18 and there were six step to the throne, with a footstool of gold,
which were fasten to the throne, and stay on each side of the
sit place, and two lion stand by the stays: 9:19 and twelve
lion stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps.
ther wa not the like made in ani kingdom.

9:20 and all the drink vessel of king solomon were of gold, and
al the vessel of the hous of the forest of lebanon were of pure
gold: none were of silver; it wa not ani thing account of in the
day of solomon.

9:21 for the king' ship went to tarshish with the servant of huram:
everi three year onc came the ship of tarshish bring gold, and
silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

9:22 and king solomon pass all the king of the earth in rich and
wisdom.

9:23 and all the king of the earth sought the presenc of solomon, to
hear hi wisdom, that god had put in hi heart.

9:24 and they brought everi man hi present, vessel of silver, and
vessel of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules,
a rate year by year.

9:25 and solomon had four thousand stall for hors and chariots, and
twelv thousand horsemen; whom he bestow in the chariot cities, and
with the king at jerusalem.

9:26 and he reign over all the king from the river even unto the
land of the philistines, and to the border of egypt.

9:27 and the king made silver in jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees
mad he as the sycomor tree that are in the low plain in abundance.

9:28 and they brought unto solomon hors out of egypt, and out of all
lands.

9:29 now the rest of the act of solomon, first and last, are they not
written in the book of nathan the prophet, and in the propheci of
ahijah the shilonite, and in the vision of iddo the seer against
jeroboam the son of nebat?  9:30 and solomon reign in jerusalem over
al israel forti years.

9:31 and solomon slept with hi fathers, and he wa buri in the city
of david hi father: and rehoboam hi son reign in hi stead.

10:1 and rehoboam went to shechem: for to shechem were all israel come
to make him king.

10:2 and it came to pass, when jeroboam the son of nebat, who wa in
egypt, whither he fled from the presenc of solomon the king, heard
it, that jeroboam return out of egypt.

10:3 and they sent and call him. So jeroboam and all israel came and
spak to rehoboam, saying, 10:4 thi father made our yoke grievous: now
therefor eas thou somewhat the grievou servitud of thi father, and
hi heavi yoke that he put upon us, and we will serv thee.

10:5 and he said unto them, come again unto me after three days. and
th peopl departed.

10:6 and king rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood
befor solomon hi father while he yet lived, saying, what counsel
g ye me to return answer to thi people?  10:7 and they spake unto
him, saying, If thou be kind to thi people, and pleas them, and
speak good word to them, they will be thi servant for ever.

10:8 but he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took
counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood
befor him.

10:9 and he said unto them, what advic give ye that we may return
answ to thi people, which have spoken to me, saying, eas somewhat
th yoke that thi father did put upon us?  10:10 and the young men
that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, thu shalt thou
answ the peopl that spake unto thee, saying, thi father made our
yok heavy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for us; thu shalt thou
say unto them, My littl finger shall be thicker than my father's
loins.

10:11 for wherea my father put a heavi yoke upon you, I will put more
to your yoke: my father chastis you with whips, but I will chastise
y with scorpions.

10:12 So jeroboam and all the peopl came to rehoboam on the third
day, as the king bade, saying, come again to me on the third day.

10:13 and the king answer them roughly; and king rehoboam forsook
th counsel of the old men, 10:14 and answer them after the advice
of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will
add thereto: my father chastis you with whips, but I will chastise
y with scorpions.

10:15 So the king hearken not unto the people: for the caus wa of
god, that the lord might perform hi word, which he spake by the hand
of ahijah the shilonit to jeroboam the son of nebat.

10:16 and when all israel saw that the king would not hearken unto
them, the peopl answer the king, saying, what portion have we in
david?  and we have none inherit in the son of jesse: everi man to
your tents, O israel: and now, david, see to thine own house. So all
israel went to their tents.

10:17 but as for the children of israel that dwelt in the citi of
judah, rehoboam reign over them.

10:18 then king rehoboam sent hadoram that wa over the tribute; and
th children of israel stone him with stones, that he died. but king
rehoboam made speed to get him up to hi chariot, to flee to
jerusalem.

10:19 and israel rebel against the hous of david unto thi day.

11:1 and when rehoboam wa come to jerusalem, he gather of the house
of judah and benjamin an hundr and fourscor thousand chosen men,
which were warriors, to fight against israel, that he might bring the
kingdom again to rehoboam.

11:2 but the word of the lord came to shemaiah the man of god, saying,
11:3 speak unto rehoboam the son of solomon, king of judah, and to all
israel in judah and benjamin, saying, 11:4 thu saith the lord, ye
shal not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return everi man to
hi house: for thi thing is done of me. and they obey the word of
th lord, and return from go against jeroboam.

11:5 and rehoboam dwelt in jerusalem, and built citi for defenc in
judah.

11:6 He built even bethlehem, and etam, and tekoa, 11:7 and bethzur,
and shoco, and adullam, 11:8 and gath, and mareshah, and ziph, 11:9
and adoraim, and lachish, and azekah, 11:10 and zorah, and aijalon,
and hebron, which are in judah and in benjamin fenc cities.

11:11 and he fortifi the strong holds, and put captain in them, and
stor of victual, and of oil and wine.

11:12 and in everi sever citi he put shield and spears, and made
them exceed strong, have judah and benjamin on hi side.

11:13 and the priest and the levit that were in all israel resorted
to him out of all their coasts.

11:14 for the levit left their suburb and their possession, and
cam to judah and jerusalem: for jeroboam and hi son had cast them
off from execut the priest' offic unto the lord: 11:15 and he
ordain him priest for the high places, and for the devils, and for
th calv which he had made.

11:16 and after them out of all the tribe of israel such as set their
heart to seek the lord god of israel came to jerusalem, to sacrifice
unto the lord god of their fathers.

11:17 So they strengthen the kingdom of judah, and made rehoboam the
son of solomon strong, three years: for three year they walk in the
way of david and solomon.

11:18 and rehoboam took him mahalath the daughter of jerimoth the son
of david to wife, and abihail the daughter of eliab the son of jesse;
11:19 which bare him children; jeush, and shamariah, and zaham.

11:20 and after her he took maachah the daughter of absalom; which
bar him abijah, and attai, and ziza, and shelomith.

11:21 and rehoboam love maachah the daughter of absalom abov all his
wiv and hi concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore
concubines; and begat twenti and eight sons, and threescore
daughters.)  11:22 and rehoboam made abijah the son of maachah the
chief, to be ruler among hi brethren: for he thought to make him
king.

11:23 and he dealt wisely, and dispers of all hi children
throughout all the countri of judah and benjamin, unto everi fenced
city: and he gave them victual in abundance. and he desir many
wives.

12:1 and it came to pass, when rehoboam had establish the kingdom,
and had strengthen himself, he forsook the law of the lord, and all
israel with him.

12:2 and it came to pass, that in the fifth year of king rehoboam
shishak king of egypt came up against jerusalem, becaus they had
transgress against the lord, 12:3 with twelv hundr chariots, and
threescor thousand horsemen: and the peopl were without number that
cam with him out of egypt; the lubims, the sukkiims, and the
ethiopians.

12:4 and he took the fenc citi which pertain to judah, and came
to jerusalem.

12:5 then came shemaiah the prophet to rehoboam, and to the princ of
judah, that were gather togeth to jerusalem becaus of shishak,
and said unto them, thu saith the lord, Ye have forsaken me, and
therefor have I also left you in the hand of shishak.

12:6 whereupon the princ of israel and the king humbl themselves;
and they said, the lord is righteous.

12:7 and when the lord saw that they humbl themselves, the word of
th lord came to shemaiah, saying, they have humbl themselves;
therefor I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some
deliverance; and my wrath shall not be pour out upon jerusalem by
th hand of shishak.

12:8 nevertheless they shall be hi servants; that they may know my
service, and the servic of the kingdom of the countries.

12:9 So shishak king of egypt came up against jerusalem, and took away
th treasur of the hous of the lord, and the treasur of the
king' house; he took all: he carri away also the shield of gold
which solomon had made.

12:10 instead of which king rehoboam made shield of brass, and
commit them to the hand of the chief of the guard, that kept the
entr of the king' house.

12:11 and when the king enter into the hous of the lord, the guard
cam and fetch them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.

12:12 and when he humbl himself, the wrath of the lord turn from
him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in judah
th went well.

12:13 So king rehoboam strengthen himself in jerusalem, and reigned:
for rehoboam wa one and forti year old when he began to reign, and
h reign seventeen year in jerusalem, the citi which the lord had
chosen out of all the tribe of israel, to put hi name there. and his
mother' name wa naamah an ammonitess.

12:14 and he did evil, becaus he prepar not hi heart to seek the
lord.

12:15 now the act of rehoboam, first and last, are they not written
in the book of shemaiah the prophet, and of iddo the seer concerning
genealogies? and there were war between rehoboam and jeroboam
continually.

12:16 and rehoboam slept with hi fathers, and wa buri in the city
of david: and abijah hi son reign in hi stead.

13:1 now in the eighteenth year of king jeroboam began abijah to reign
ov judah.

13:2 He reign three year in jerusalem. hi mother' name also was
michaiah the daughter of uriel of gibeah. and there wa war between
abijah and jeroboam.

13:3 and abijah set the battl in array with an armi of valiant men of
war, even four hundr thousand chosen men: jeroboam also set the
battl in array against him with eight hundr thousand chosen men,
b mighti men of valour.

13:4 and abijah stood up upon mount zemaraim, which is in mount
ephraim, and said, hear me, thou jeroboam, and all israel; 13:5 ought
y not to know that the lord god of israel gave the kingdom over
israel to david for ever, even to him and to hi son by a coven of
salt?  13:6 yet jeroboam the son of nebat, the servant of solomon the
son of david, is risen up, and hath rebel against hi lord.

13:7 and there are gather unto him vain men, the children of belial,
and have strengthen themselv against rehoboam the son of solomon,
when rehoboam wa young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand
them.

13:8 and now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the lord in the hand
of the son of david; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with
your golden calves, which jeroboam made you for gods.

13:9 have ye not cast out the priest of the lord, the son of aaron,
and the levites, and have made you priest after the manner of the
nat of other lands? so that whosoev cometh to consecr himself
with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them
that are no gods.

13:10 but as for us, the lord is our god, and we have not forsaken
him; and the priests, which minist unto the lord, are the son of
aaron, and the levit wait upon their business: 13:11 and they burn
unto the lord everi morn and everi even burnt sacrific and
sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure
table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamp thereof, to burn
everi evening: for we keep the charg of the lord our god; but ye have
forsaken him.

13:12 and, behold, god himself is with us for our captain, and his
priest with sound trumpet to cri alarm against you. O children of
israel, fight ye not against the lord god of your fathers; for ye
shal not prosper.

13:13 but jeroboam caus an ambush to come about behind them: so
they were befor judah, and the ambush wa behind them.

13:14 and when judah look back, behold, the battl wa befor and
behind: and they cri unto the lord, and the priest sound with the
trumpets.

13:15 then the men of judah gave a shout: and as the men of judah
shouted, it came to pass, that god smote jeroboam and all israel
befor abijah and judah.

13:16 and the children of israel fled befor judah: and god delivered
them into their hand.

13:17 and abijah and hi peopl slew them with a great slaughter: so
ther fell down slain of israel five hundr thousand chosen men.

13:18 thu the children of israel were brought under at that time, and
th children of judah prevailed, becaus they reli upon the lord god
of their fathers.

13:19 and abijah pursu after jeroboam, and took citi from him,
bethel with the town thereof, and jeshanah with the town thereof,
and ephraim with the town thereof.

13:20 neither did jeroboam recov strength again in the day of
abijah: and the lord struck him, and he died.

13:21 but abijah wax mighty, and marri fourteen wives, and begat
twenti and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

13:22 and the rest of the act of abijah, and hi ways, and his
sayings, are written in the stori of the prophet iddo.

14:1 So abijah slept with hi fathers, and they buri him in the city
of david: and asa hi son reign in hi stead. In hi day the land
wa quiet ten years.

14:2 and asa did that which wa good and right in the eye of the lord
hi god: 14:3 for he took away the altar of the strang gods, and the
high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves: 14:4
and command judah to seek the lord god of their fathers, and to do
th law and the commandment.

14:5 also he took away out of all the citi of judah the high places
and the images: and the kingdom wa quiet befor him.

14:6 and he built fenc citi in judah: for the land had rest, and
h had no war in those years; becaus the lord had given him rest.

14:7 therefor he said unto judah, let us build these cities, and make
about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet
befor us; becaus we have sought the lord our god, we have sought
him, and he hath given us rest on everi side. So they built and
prospered.

14:8 and asa had an armi of men that bare target and spears, out of
judah three hundr thousand; and out of benjamin, that bare shields
and drew bows, two hundr and fourscor thousand: all these were
mighti men of valour.

14:9 and there came out against them zerah the ethiopian with an host
of a thousand thousand, and three hundr chariots; and came unto
mareshah.

14:10 then asa went out against him, and they set the battl in array
in the valley of zephathah at mareshah.

14:11 and asa cri unto the lord hi god, and said, lord, it is
noth with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have
no power: help us, O lord our god; for we rest on thee, and in thy
nam we go against thi multitude. O lord, thou art our god; let no
man prevail against thee.

14:12 So the lord smote the ethiopian befor asa, and befor judah;
and the ethiopian fled.

14:13 and asa and the peopl that were with him pursu them unto
gerar: and the ethiopian were overthrown, that they could not recover
themselves; for they were destroy befor the lord, and befor his
host; and they carri away veri much spoil.

14:14 and they smote all the citi round about gerar; for the fear of
th lord came upon them: and they spoil all the cities; for there
wa exceed much spoil in them.

14:15 they smote also the tent of cattle, and carri away sheep and
camel in abundance, and return to jerusalem.

15:1 and the spirit of god came upon azariah the son of oded: 15:2 and
h went out to meet asa, and said unto him, hear ye me, asa, and all
judah and benjamin; the lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if
y seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsak him, he will
forsak you.

15:3 now for a long season israel hath been without the true god, and
without a teach priest, and without law.

15:4 but when they in their troubl did turn unto the lord god of
israel, and sought him, he wa found of them.

15:5 and in those time there wa no peac to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexat were upon all the inhabitants
of the countries.

15:6 and nation wa destroy of nation, and citi of city: for god did
vex them with all adversity.

15:7 Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hand be weak: for your
work shall be rewarded.

15:8 and when asa heard these words, and the propheci of ode the
prophet, he took courage, and put away the abomin idol out of all
th land of judah and benjamin, and out of the citi which he had
taken from mount ephraim, and renew the altar of the lord, that was
befor the porch of the lord.

15:9 and he gather all judah and benjamin, and the stranger with
them out of ephraim and manasseh, and out of simeon: for they fell to
him out of israel in abundance, when they saw that the lord hi god
wa with him.

15:10 So they gather themselv togeth at jerusalem in the third
month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of asa.

15:11 and they offer unto the lord the same time, of the spoil which
they had brought, seven hundr oxen and seven thousand sheep.

15:12 and they enter into a coven to seek the lord god of their
fath with all their heart and with all their soul; 15:13 that
whosoev would not seek the lord god of israel should be put to
death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.

15:14 and they sware unto the lord with a loud voice, and with
shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.

15:15 and all judah rejoic at the oath: for they had sworn with all
their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he wa found
of them: and the lord gave them rest round about.

15:16 and also concern maachah the mother of asa the king, he
remov her from be queen, becaus she had made an idol in a grove:
and asa cut down her idol, and stamp it, and burnt it at the brook
kidron.

15:17 but the high place were not taken away out of israel:
nevertheless the heart of asa wa perfect all hi days.

15:18 and he brought into the hous of god the thing that hi father
had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold,
and vessels.

15:19 and there wa no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of
th reign of asa.

16:1 In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of asa baasha king of
israel came up against judah, and built ramah, to the intent that he
might let none go out or come in to asa king of judah.

16:2 then asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasur of the
hous of the lord and of the king' house, and sent to benhadad king
of syria, that dwelt at damascus, saying, 16:3 there is a league
between me and thee, as there wa between my father and thi father:
behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thi leagu with
baasha king of israel, that he may depart from me.

16:4 and benhadad hearken unto king asa, and sent the captain of
hi armi against the citi of israel; and they smote ijon, and dan,
and abelmaim, and all the store citi of naphtali.

16:5 and it came to pass, when baasha heard it, that he left off
build of ramah, and let hi work cease.

16:6 then asa the king took all judah; and they carri away the
ston of ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith baasha was
building; and he built therewith geba and mizpah.

16:7 and at that time hanani the seer came to asa king of judah, and
said unto him, becaus thou hast reli on the king of syria, and not
r on the lord thi god, therefor is the host of the king of syria
escap out of thine hand.

16:8 were not the ethiopian and the lubim a huge host, with very
mani chariot and horsemen? yet, becaus thou didst reli on the lord,
h deliv them into thine hand.

16:9 for the eye of the lord run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. herein thou hast done foolishly: therefor from
henceforth thou shalt have wars.

16:10 then asa wa wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house;
for he wa in a rage with him becaus of thi thing. and asa oppressed
som of the peopl the same time.

16:11 and, behold, the act of asa, first and last, lo, they are
written in the book of the king of judah and israel.

16:12 and asa in the thirti and ninth year of hi reign wa diseased
in hi feet, until hi diseas wa exceed great: yet in hi disease
h sought not to the lord, but to the physicians.

16:13 and asa slept with hi fathers, and die in the one and fortieth
year of hi reign.

16:14 and they buri him in hi own sepulchres, which he had made for
himself in the citi of david, and laid him in the bed which wa filled
with sweet odour and diver kind of spice prepar by the
apothecaries' art: and they made a veri great burn for him.

17:1 and jehoshaphat hi son reign in hi stead, and strengthened
himself against israel.

17:2 and he place forc in all the fenc citi of judah, and set
garrison in the land of judah, and in the citi of ephraim, which
asa hi father had taken.

17:3 and the lord wa with jehoshaphat, becaus he walk in the first
way of hi father david, and sought not unto baalim; 17:4 but sought
to the lord god of hi father, and walk in hi commandments, and not
aft the do of israel.

17:5 therefor the lord stablish the kingdom in hi hand; and all
judah brought to jehoshaphat presents; and he had rich and honour in
abundance.

17:6 and hi heart wa lift up in the way of the lord: moreov he
took away the high place and grove out of judah.

17:7 also in the third year of hi reign he sent to hi princes, even
to benhail, and to obadiah, and to zechariah, and to nethaneel, and to
michaiah, to teach in the citi of judah.

17:8 and with them he sent levites, even shemaiah, and nethaniah, and
zebadiah, and asahel, and shemiramoth, and jehonathan, and adonijah,
and tobijah, and tobadonijah, levites; and with them elishama and
jehoram, priests.

17:9 and they taught in judah, and had the book of the law of the lord
with them, and went about throughout all the citi of judah, and
taught the people.

17:10 and the fear of the lord fell upon all the kingdom of the lands
that were round about judah, so that they made no war against
jehoshaphat.

17:11 also some of the philistin brought jehoshaphat presents, and
tribut silver; and the arabian brought him flocks, seven thousand
and seven hundr rams, and seven thousand and seven hundr he goats.

17:12 and jehoshaphat wax great exceedingly; and he built in judah
castles, and citi of store.

17:13 and he had much busi in the citi of judah: and the men of
war, mighti men of valour, were in jerusalem.

17:14 and these are the number of them accord to the hous of
their fathers: Of judah, the captain of thousands; adnah the chief,
and with him mighti men of valour three hundr thousand.

17:15 and next to him wa jehohanan the captain, and with him two
hundr and fourscor thousand.

17:16 and next him wa amasiah the son of zichri, who willingly
off himself unto the lord; and with him two hundr thousand
mighti men of valour.

17:17 and of benjamin; eliada a mighti man of valour, and with him
arm men with bow and shield two hundr thousand.

17:18 and next him wa jehozabad, and with him an hundr and
fourscor thousand readi prepar for the war.

17:19 these wait on the king, besid those whom the king put in the
fenc citi throughout all judah.

18:1 now jehoshaphat had rich and honour in abundance, and joined
affin with ahab.

18:2 and after certain year he went down to ahab to samaria. and ahab
kil sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the peopl that he
had with him, and persuad him to go up with him to ramothgilead.

18:3 and ahab king of israel said unto jehoshaphat king of judah, wilt
thou go with me to ramothgilead? and he answer him, I am as thou
art, and my peopl as thi people; and we will be with thee in the war.

18:4 and jehoshaphat said unto the king of israel, enquire, I pray
thee, at the word of the lord to day.

18:5 therefor the king of israel gather togeth of prophet four
hundr men, and said unto them, shall we go to ramothgilead to
battle, or shall I forbear? and they said, Go up; for god will deliver
it into the king' hand.

18:6 but jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the lord
besides, that we might enquir of him?  18:7 and the king of israel
said unto jehoshaphat, there is yet one man, by whom we may enquir of
th lord: but I hate him; for he never prophesi good unto me, but
alway evil: the same is micaiah the son of imla. and jehoshaphat
said, let not the king say so.

18:8 and the king of israel call for one of hi officers, and said,
fetch quickli micaiah the son of imla.

18:9 and the king of israel and jehoshaphat king of judah sat either
of them on hi throne, cloth in their robes, and they sat in a void
plac at the enter in of the gate of samaria; and all the prophets
prophesi befor them.

18:10 and zedekiah the son of chenaanah had made him horn of iron,
and said, thu saith the lord, with these thou shalt push syria until
they be consumed.

18:11 and all the prophet prophesi so, saying, Go up to
ramothgilead, and prosper: for the lord shall deliv it into the hand
of the king.

18:12 and the messeng that went to call micaiah spake to him,
saying, behold, the word of the prophet declar good to the king
with one assent; let thi word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of
their's, and speak thou good.

18:13 and micaiah said, As the lord liveth, even what my god saith,
that will I speak.

18:14 and when he wa come to the king, the king said unto him,
micaiah, shall we go to ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear?
and he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be deliv into
your hand.

18:15 and the king said to him, how mani time shall I adjur thee
that thou say noth but the truth to me in the name of the lord?
18:16 then he said, I did see all israel scatter upon the mountains,
a sheep that have no shepherd: and the lord said, these have no
master; let them return therefor everi man to hi hous in peace.

18:17 and the king of israel said to jehoshaphat, did I not tell thee
that he would not prophesi good unto me, but evil?  18:18 again he
said, therefor hear the word of the lord; I saw the lord sit upon
hi throne, and all the host of heaven stand on hi right hand and
on hi left.

18:19 and the lord said, who shall entic ahab king of israel, that he
may go up and fall at ramothgilead? and one spake say after this
manner, and anoth say after that manner.

18:20 then there came out a spirit, and stood befor the lord, and
said, I will entic him. and the lord said unto him, wherewith?  18:21
and he said, I will go out, and be a lie spirit in the mouth of all
hi prophets. and the lord said, thou shalt entic him, and thou shalt
also prevail: go out, and do even so.

18:22 now therefore, behold, the lord hath put a lie spirit in the
mouth of these thi prophets, and the lord hath spoken evil against
thee.

18:23 then zedekiah the son of chenaanah came near, and smote micaiah
upon the cheek, and said, which way went the spirit of the lord from
m to speak unto thee?  18:24 and micaiah said, behold, thou shalt see
on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

18:25 then the king of israel said, take ye micaiah, and carri him
back to amon the governor of the city, and to joash the king' son;
18:26 and say, thu saith the king, put thi fellow in the prison, and
fe him with bread of afflict and with water of affliction, until
i return in peace.

18:27 and micaiah said, If thou certainli return in peace, then hath
not the lord spoken by me. and he said, hearken, all ye people.

18:28 So the king of israel and jehoshaphat the king of judah went up
to ramothgilead.

18:29 and the king of israel said unto jehoshaphat, I will disguise
myself, and I will go to the battle; but put thou on thi robes. So the
k of israel disguis himself; and they went to the battle.

18:30 now the king of syria had command the captain of the chariots
that were with him, saying, fight ye not with small or great, save
onli with the king of israel.

18:31 and it came to pass, when the captain of the chariot saw
jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of israel. therefor they
compass about him to fight: but jehoshaphat cri out, and the lord
help him; and god move them to depart from him.

18:32 for it came to pass, that, when the captain of the chariots
perceiv that it wa not the king of israel, they turn back again
from pursu him.

18:33 and a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
israel between the joint of the harness: therefor he said to his
chariot man, turn thine hand, that thou mayest carri me out of the
host; for I am wounded.

18:34 and the battl increas that day: howbeit the king of israel
stay himself up in hi chariot against the syrian until the even:
and about the time of the sun go down he died.

19:1 and jehoshaphat the king of judah return to hi hous in peace
to jerusalem.

19:2 and jehu the son of hanani the seer went out to meet him, and
said to king jehoshaphat, shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the lord? therefor is wrath upon thee from befor the
lord.

19:3 nevertheless there are good thing found in thee, in that thou
hast taken away the grove out of the land, and hast prepar thine
heart to seek god.

19:4 and jehoshaphat dwelt at jerusalem: and he went out again through
th peopl from beersheba to mount ephraim, and brought them back unto
th lord god of their fathers.

19:5 and he set judg in the land throughout all the fenc citi of
judah, citi by city, 19:6 and said to the judges, take heed what ye
do: for ye judg not for man, but for the lord, who is with you in the
judgment.

19:7 wherefor now let the fear of the lord be upon you; take heed and
do it: for there is no iniqu with the lord our god, nor respect of
persons, nor take of gifts.

19:8 moreov in jerusalem did jehoshaphat set of the levites, and of
th priests, and of the chief of the father of israel, for the
judg of the lord, and for controversies, when they return to
jerusalem.

19:9 and he charg them, saying, thu shall ye do in the fear of the
lord, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

19:10 and what caus soever shall come to you of your brethren that
dwel in your cities, between blood and blood, between law and
commandment, statut and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they
trespass not against the lord, and so wrath come upon you, and upon
your brethren: thi do, and ye shall not trespass.

19:11 and, behold, amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters
of the lord; and zebadiah the son of ishmael, the ruler of the house
of judah, for all the king' matters: also the levit shall be
offic befor you. deal courageously, and the lord shall be with the
good.

20:1 It came to pass after thi also, that the children of moab, and
th children of ammon, and with them other besid the ammonites, came
against jehoshaphat to battle.

20:2 then there came some that told jehoshaphat, saying, there cometh
a great multitud against thee from beyond the sea on thi side syria;
and, behold, they be in hazazontamar, which is engedi.

20:3 and jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the lord, and
proclaim a fast throughout all judah.

20:4 and judah gather themselv together, to ask help of the lord:
even out of all the citi of judah they came to seek the lord.

20:5 and jehoshaphat stood in the congreg of judah and jerusalem,
in the hous of the lord, befor the new court, 20:6 and said, O lord
god of our fathers, art not thou god in heaven? and rulest not thou
ov all the kingdom of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not
pow and might, so that none is abl to withstand thee?  20:7 art not
thou our god, who didst drive out the inhabit of thi land before
thi peopl israel, and gavest it to the seed of abraham thi friend for
ever?  20:8 and they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary
therein for thi name, saying, 20:9 if, when evil cometh upon us, as
th sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand befor this
house, and in thi presence, (for thi name is in thi house,) and cry
unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.

20:10 and now, behold, the children of ammon and moab and mount seir,
whom thou wouldest not let israel invade, when they came out of the
land of egypt, but they turn from them, and destroy them not;
20:11 behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.

20:12 O our god, wilt thou not judg them? for we have no might
against thi great compani that cometh against us; neither know we
what to do: but our eye are upon thee.

20:13 and all judah stood befor the lord, with their littl ones,
their wives, and their children.

20:14 then upon jahaziel the son of zechariah, the son of benaiah, the
son of jeiel, the son of mattaniah, a levit of the son of asaph,
cam the spirit of the lord in the midst of the congregation; 20:15
and he said, hearken ye, all judah, and ye inhabit of jerusalem,
and thou king jehoshaphat, thu saith the lord unto you, Be not afraid
nor dismay by reason of thi great multitude; for the battl is not
yours, but god's.

20:16 To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the
cliff of ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before
th wilder of jeruel.

20:17 Ye shall not need to fight in thi battle: set yourselves, stand
y still, and see the salvat of the lord with you, O judah and
jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them:
for the lord will be with you.

20:18 and jehoshaphat bow hi head with hi face to the ground: and
al judah and the inhabit of jerusalem fell befor the lord,
worship the lord.

20:19 and the levites, of the children of the kohathites, and of the
children of the korhites, stood up to prais the lord god of israel
with a loud voic on high.

20:20 and they rose earli in the morning, and went forth into the
wild of tekoa: and as they went forth, jehoshaphat stood and
said, hear me, O judah, and ye inhabit of jerusalem; believ in
th lord your god, so shall ye be established; believ hi prophets,
so shall ye prosper.

20:21 and when he had consult with the people, he appoint singers
unto the lord, and that should prais the beauti of holiness, as they
went out befor the army, and to say, prais the lord; for hi mercy
endureth for ever.

20:22 and when they began to sing and to praise, the lord set
ambush against the children of ammon, moab, and mount seir, which
wer come against judah; and they were smitten.

20:23 for the children of ammon and moab stood up against the
inhabit of mount seir, utterli to slay and destroy them: and when
they had made an end of the inhabit of seir, everi one help to
destroy another.

20:24 and when judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness,
they look unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies
fallen to the earth, and none escaped.

20:25 and when jehoshaphat and hi peopl came to take away the spoil
of them, they found among them in abund both rich with the dead
bodies, and preciou jewels, which they strip off for themselves,
mor than they could carri away: and they were three day in gathering
of the spoil, it wa so much.

20:26 and on the fourth day they assembl themselv in the valley of
berachah; for there they bless the lord: therefor the name of the
sam place wa called, the valley of berachah, unto thi day.

20:27 then they returned, everi man of judah and jerusalem, and
jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to jerusalem with
joy; for the lord had made them to rejoic over their enemies.

20:28 and they came to jerusalem with psalteri and harp and
trumpet unto the hous of the lord.

20:29 and the fear of god wa on all the kingdom of those countries,
when they had heard that the lord fought against the enemi of
israel.

20:30 So the realm of jehoshaphat wa quiet: for hi god gave him rest
round about.

20:31 and jehoshaphat reign over judah: he wa thirti and five years
old when he began to reign, and he reign twenti and five year in
jerusalem.

and hi mother' name wa azubah the daughter of shilhi.

20:32 and he walk in the way of asa hi father, and depart not
from it, do that which wa right in the sight of the lord.

20:33 howbeit the high place were not taken away: for as yet the
peopl had not prepar their heart unto the god of their fathers.

20:34 now the rest of the act of jehoshaphat, first and last, behold,
they are written in the book of jehu the son of hanani, who is
ment in the book of the king of israel.

20:35 and after thi did jehoshaphat king of judah join himself with
ahaziah king of israel, who did veri wickedly: 20:36 and he joined
himself with him to make ship to go to tarshish: and they made the
ship in eziongaber.

20:37 then eliez the son of dodavah of mareshah prophesi against
jehoshaphat, saying, becaus thou hast join thyself with ahaziah,
th lord hath broken thi works. and the ship were broken, that they
wer not abl to go to tarshish.

21:1 now jehoshaphat slept with hi fathers, and wa buri with his
fath in the citi of david. and jehoram hi son reign in his
stead.

21:2 and he had brethren the son of jehoshaphat, azariah, and jehiel,
and zechariah, and azariah, and michael, and shephatiah: all these
wer the son of jehoshaphat king of israel.

21:3 and their father gave them great gift of silver, and of gold,
and of preciou things, with fenc citi in judah: but the kingdom
gav he to jehoram; becaus he wa the firstborn.

21:4 now when jehoram wa risen up to the kingdom of hi father, he
strengthen himself, and slew all hi brethren with the sword, and
div also of the princ of israel.

21:5 jehoram wa thirti and two year old when he began to reign, and
h reign eight year in jerusalem.

21:6 and he walk in the way of the king of israel, like as did the
hous of ahab: for he had the daughter of ahab to wife: and he wrought
that which wa evil in the eye of the lord.

21:7 howbeit the lord would not destroy the hous of david, becaus of
th coven that he had made with david, and as he promis to give a
light to him and to hi son for ever.

21:8 In hi day the edomit revolt from under the dominion of
judah, and made themselv a king.

21:9 then jehoram went forth with hi princes, and all hi chariots
with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the edomit which
compass him in, and the captain of the chariots.

21:10 So the edomit revolt from under the hand of judah unto this
day.

th same time also did libnah revolt from under hi hand; becaus he
had forsaken the lord god of hi fathers.

21:11 moreov he made high place in the mountain of judah and
caus the inhabit of jerusalem to commit fornication, and
compel judah thereto.

21:12 and there came a write to him from elijah the prophet, saying,
thu saith the lord god of david thi father, becaus thou hast not
walk in the way of jehoshaphat thi father, nor in the way of asa
k of judah, 21:13 but hast walk in the way of the king of
israel, and hast made judah and the inhabit of jerusalem to go a
whoring, like to the whoredom of the hous of ahab, and also hast
slain thi brethren of thi father' house, which were better than
thyself: 21:14 behold, with a great plagu will the lord smite thy
people, and thi children, and thi wives, and all thi goods: 21:15 and
thou shalt have great sick by diseas of thi bowels, until thy
bowel fall out by reason of the sick day by day.

21:16 moreov the lord stir up against jehoram the spirit of the
philistines, and of the arabians, that were near the ethiopians: 21:17
and they came up into judah, and brake into it, and carri away all
th substanc that wa found in the king' house, and hi son also,
and hi wives; so that there wa never a son left him, save jehoahaz,
th youngest of hi sons.

21:18 and after all thi the lord smote him in hi bowel with an
incur disease.

21:19 and it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of
two years, hi bowel fell out by reason of hi sickness: so he died
of sore diseases. and hi peopl made no burn for him, like the
burn of hi fathers.

21:20 thirti and two year old wa he when he began to reign, and he
reign in jerusalem eight years, and depart without be desired.
howbeit they buri him in the citi of david, but not in the
sepulchr of the kings.

22:1 and the inhabit of jerusalem made ahaziah hi youngest son
k in hi stead: for the band of men that came with the arabian to
th camp had slain all the eldest. So ahaziah the son of jehoram king
of judah reigned.

22:2 forti and two year old wa ahaziah when he began to reign, and
h reign one year in jerusalem. hi mother' name also wa athaliah
th daughter of omri.

22:3 He also walk in the way of the hous of ahab: for hi mother
wa hi counsellor to do wickedly.

22:4 wherefor he did evil in the sight of the lord like the hous of
ahab: for they were hi counsellor after the death of hi father to
hi destruction.

22:5 He walk also after their counsel, and went with jehoram the son
of ahab king of israel to war against hazael king of syria at
ramothgilead: and the syrian smote joram.

22:6 and he return to be heal in jezreel becaus of the wounds
which were given him at ramah, when he fought with hazael king of
syria. and azariah the son of jehoram king of judah went down to see
jehoram the son of ahab at jezreel, becaus he wa sick.

22:7 and the destruct of ahaziah wa of god by come to joram: for
when he wa come, he went out with jehoram against jehu the son of
nimshi, whom the lord had anoint to cut off the hous of ahab.

22:8 and it came to pass, that, when jehu wa execut judgment upon
th hous of ahab, and found the princ of judah, and the son of the
brethren of ahaziah, that minist to ahaziah, he slew them.

22:9 and he sought ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he wa hid in
samaria,) and brought him to jehu: and when they had slain him, they
buri him: because, said they, he is the son of jehoshaphat, who
sought the lord with all hi heart. So the hous of ahaziah had no
pow to keep still the kingdom.

22:10 but when athaliah the mother of ahaziah saw that her son was
dead, she aros and destroy all the seed royal of the hous of
judah.

22:11 but jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took joash the son
of ahaziah, and stole him from among the king' son that were slain,
and put him and hi nurs in a bedchamber. So jehoshabeath, the
daught of king jehoram, the wife of jehoiada the priest, (for she
wa the sister of ahaziah,) hid him from athaliah, so that she slew
him not.

22:12 and he wa with them hid in the hous of god six years: and
athaliah reign over the land.

23:1 and in the seventh year jehoiada strengthen himself, and took
th captain of hundreds, azariah the son of jeroham, and ishmael the
son of jehohanan, and azariah the son of obed, and maaseiah the son of
adaiah, and elishaphat the son of zichri, into coven with him.

23:2 and they went about in judah, and gather the levit out of all
th citi of judah, and the chief of the father of israel, and they
cam to jerusalem.

23:3 and all the congreg made a coven with the king in the
hous of god. and he said unto them, behold, the king' son shall
reign, as the lord hath said of the son of david.

23:4 thi is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering
on the sabbath, of the priest and of the levites, shall be porter of
th doors; 23:5 and a third part shall be at the king' house; and a
third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the peopl shall be
in the court of the hous of the lord.

23:6 but let none come into the hous of the lord, save the priests,
and they that minist of the levites; they shall go in, for they are
holy: but all the peopl shall keep the watch of the lord.

23:7 and the levit shall compass the king round about, everi man
with hi weapon in hi hand; and whosoev els cometh into the
house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he
cometh in, and when he goeth out.

23:8 So the levit and all judah did accord to all thing that
jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took everi man hi men that
wer to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the
sabbath: for jehoiada the priest dismiss not the courses.

23:9 moreov jehoiada the priest deliv to the captain of
hundr spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king
david's, which were in the hous of god.

23:10 and he set all the people, everi man have hi weapon in his
hand, from the right side of the templ to the left side of the
temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.

23:11 then they brought out the king' son, and put upon him the
crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. and jehoiada and
hi son anoint him, and said, god save the king.

23:12 now when athaliah heard the nois of the peopl run and
prais the king, she came to the peopl into the hous of the lord:
23:13 and she looked, and, behold, the king stood at hi pillar at the
ent in, and the princ and the trumpet by the king: and all the
peopl of the land rejoiced, and sound with trumpets, also the
sing with instrument of musick, and such as taught to sing praise.
then athaliah rent her clothes, and said, treason, treason.

23:14 then jehoiada the priest brought out the captain of hundreds
that were set over the host, and said unto them, have her forth of the
ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. for
th priest said, slay her not in the hous of the lord.

23:15 So they laid hand on her; and when she wa come to the entering
of the hors gate by the king' house, they slew her there.

23:16 and jehoiada made a coven between him, and between all the
people, and between the king, that they should be the lord' people.

23:17 then all the peopl went to the hous of baal, and brake it
down, and brake hi altar and hi imag in pieces, and slew mattan
th priest of baal befor the altars.

23:18 also jehoiada appoint the offic of the hous of the lord by
th hand of the priest the levites, whom david had distribut in the
hous of the lord, to offer the burnt offer of the lord, as it is
written in the law of moses, with rejoic and with singing, as it
wa ordain by david.

23:19 and he set the porter at the gate of the hous of the lord,
that none which wa unclean in ani thing should enter in.

23:20 and he took the captain of hundreds, and the nobles, and the
governor of the people, and all the peopl of the land, and brought
down the king from the hous of the lord: and they came through the
high gate into the king' house, and set the king upon the throne of
th kingdom.

23:21 and all the peopl of the land rejoiced: and the citi wa quiet,
aft that they had slain athaliah with the sword.

24:1 joash wa seven year old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forti year in jerusalem. hi mother' name also wa zibiah of
beersheba.

24:2 and joash did that which wa right in the sight of the lord all
th day of jehoiada the priest.

24:3 and jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat son and
daughters.

24:4 and it came to pass after this, that joash wa mind to repair
th hous of the lord.

24:5 and he gather togeth the priest and the levites, and said to
them, Go out unto the citi of judah, and gather of all israel money
to repair the hous of your god from year to year, and see that ye
hasten the matter. howbeit the levit hasten it not.

24:6 and the king call for jehoiada the chief, and said unto him,
whi hast thou not requir of the levit to bring in out of judah and
out of jerusalem the collection, accord to the command of moses
th servant of the lord, and of the congreg of israel, for the
tabernacl of witness?  24:7 for the son of athaliah, that wicked
woman, had broken up the hous of god; and also all the dedicated
th of the hous of the lord did they bestow upon baalim.

24:8 and at the king' command they made a chest, and set it
without at the gate of the hous of the lord.

24:9 and they made a proclam through judah and jerusalem, to
br in to the lord the collect that mose the servant of god laid
upon israel in the wilderness.

24:10 and all the princ and all the peopl rejoiced, and brought in,
and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.

24:11 now it came to pass, that at what time the chest wa brought
unto the king' offic by the hand of the levites, and when they saw
that there wa much money, the king' scribe and the high priest's
offic came and empti the chest, and took it, and carri it to his
plac again. thu they did day by day, and gather money in
abundance.

24:12 and the king and jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the
servic of the hous of the lord, and hire mason and carpent to
repair the hous of the lord, and also such as wrought iron and brass
to mend the hous of the lord.

24:13 So the workmen wrought, and the work wa perfect by them, and
they set the hous of god in hi state, and strengthen it.

24:14 and when they had finish it, they brought the rest of the
money befor the king and jehoiada, whereof were made vessel for the
hous of the lord, even vessel to minister, and to offer withal, and
spoons, and vessel of gold and silver. and they offer burnt
off in the hous of the lord continu all the day of
jehoiada.

24:15 but jehoiada wax old, and wa full of day when he died; an
hundr and thirti year old wa he when he died.

24:16 and they buri him in the citi of david among the kings,
becaus he had done good in israel, both toward god, and toward his
house.

24:17 now after the death of jehoiada came the princ of judah, and
mad obeis to the king. then the king hearken unto them.

24:18 and they left the hous of the lord god of their fathers, and
serv grove and idols: and wrath came upon judah and jerusalem for
thi their trespass.

24:19 yet he sent prophet to them, to bring them again unto the lord;
and they testifi against them: but they would not give ear.

24:20 and the spirit of god came upon zechariah the son of jehoiada
th priest, which stood abov the people, and said unto them, thus
saith god, whi transgress ye the command of the lord, that ye
cannot prosper? becaus ye have forsaken the lord, he hath also
forsaken you.

24:21 and they conspir against him, and stone him with stone at
th command of the king in the court of the hous of the lord.

24:22 thu joash the king rememb not the kind which jehoiada
hi father had done to him, but slew hi son. and when he died, he
said, the lord look upon it, and requir it.

24:23 and it came to pass at the end of the year, that the host of
syria came up against him: and they came to judah and jerusalem, and
destroy all the princ of the peopl from among the people, and
sent all the spoil of them unto the king of damascus.

24:24 for the armi of the syrian came with a small compani of men,
and the lord deliv a veri great host into their hand, becaus they
had forsaken the lord god of their fathers. So they execut judgment
against joash.

24:25 and when they were depart from him, (for they left him in
great diseases,) hi own servant conspir against him for the blood
of the son of jehoiada the priest, and slew him on hi bed, and he
died: and they buri him in the citi of david, but they buri him
not in the sepulchr of the kings.

24:26 and these are they that conspir against him; zabad the son of
shimeath an ammonitess, and jehozabad the son of shimrith a moabitess.

24:27 now concern hi sons, and the great of the burden laid
upon him, and the repair of the hous of god, behold, they are
written in the stori of the book of the kings. and amaziah hi son
reign in hi stead.

25:1 amaziah wa twenti and five year old when he began to reign, and
h reign twenti and nine year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name
wa jehoaddan of jerusalem.

25:2 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord, but not
with a perfect heart.

25:3 now it came to pass, when the kingdom wa establish to him,
that he slew hi servant that had kill the king hi father.

25:4 but he slew not their children, but did as it is written in the
law in the book of moses, where the lord commanded, saying, the
fath shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die
for the fathers, but everi man shall die for hi own sin.

25:5 moreov amaziah gather judah together, and made them captains
ov thousands, and captain over hundreds, accord to the hous of
their fathers, throughout all judah and benjamin: and he number them
from twenti year old and above, and found them three hundr thousand
choic men, abl to go forth to war, that could handl spear and
shield.

25:6 He hire also an hundr thousand mighti men of valour out of
israel for an hundr talent of silver.

25:7 but there came a man of god to him, saying, O king, let not the
armi of israel go with thee; for the lord is not with israel, to wit,
with all the children of ephraim.

25:8 but if thou wilt go, do it; be strong for the battle: god shall
mak thee fall befor the enemy: for god hath power to help, and to
cast down.

25:9 and amaziah said to the man of god, but what shall we do for the
hundr talent which I have given to the armi of israel? and the man
of god answered, the lord is abl to give thee much more than this.

25:10 then amaziah separ them, to wit, the armi that wa come to
him out of ephraim, to go home again: wherefor their anger was
greatli kindl against judah, and they return home in great anger.

25:11 and amaziah strengthen himself, and led forth hi people, and
went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of seir ten
thousand.

25:12 and other ten thousand left aliv did the children of judah
carri away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and
cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in
pieces.

25:13 but the soldier of the armi which amaziah sent back, that they
should not go with him to battle, fell upon the citi of judah, from
samaria even unto bethhoron, and smote three thousand of them, and
took much spoil.

25:14 now it came to pass, after that amaziah wa come from the
slaught of the edomites, that he brought the god of the children of
seir, and set them up to be hi gods, and bow down himself before
them, and burn incens unto them.

25:15 wherefor the anger of the lord wa kindl against amaziah, and
h sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, whi hast thou sought
aft the god of the people, which could not deliv their own people
out of thine hand?  25:16 and it came to pass, as he talk with him,
that the king said unto him, art thou made of the king' counsel?
forbear; whi shouldest thou be smitten? then the prophet forbare, and
said, I know that god hath determin to destroy thee, becaus thou
hast done this, and hast not hearken unto my counsel.

25:17 then amaziah king of judah took advice, and sent to joash, the
son of jehoahaz, the son of jehu, king of israel, saying, come, let us
se one anoth in the face.

25:18 and joash king of israel sent to amaziah king of judah, saying,
th thistl that wa in lebanon sent to the cedar that wa in lebanon,
saying, give thi daughter to my son to wife: and there pass by a
wild beast that wa in lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

25:19 thou sayest, lo, thou hast smitten the edomites; and thine heart
lifteth thee up to boast: abid now at home; whi shouldest thou meddle
to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and judah with
thee?  25:20 but amaziah would not hear; for it came of god, that he
might deliv them into the hand of their enemies, becaus they sought
aft the god of edom.

25:21 So joash the king of israel went up; and they saw one anoth in
th face, both he and amaziah king of judah, at bethshemesh, which
belongeth to judah.

25:22 and judah wa put to the wors befor israel, and they fled
everi man to hi tent.

25:23 and joash the king of israel took amaziah king of judah, the son
of joash, the son of jehoahaz, at bethshemesh, and brought him to
jerusalem, and brake down the wall of jerusalem from the gate of
ephraim to the corner gate, four hundr cubits.

25:24 and he took all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels
that were found in the hous of god with obededom, and the treasures
of the king' house, the hostag also, and return to samaria.

25:25 and amaziah the son of joash king of judah live after the death
of joash son of jehoahaz king of israel fifteen years.

25:26 now the rest of the act of amaziah, first and last, behold, are
they not written in the book of the king of judah and israel?  25:27
now after the time that amaziah did turn away from follow the lord
they made a conspiraci against him in jerusalem; and he fled to
lachish: but they sent to lachish after him, and slew him there.

25:28 and they brought him upon horses, and buri him with his
fath in the citi of judah.

26:1 then all the peopl of judah took uzziah, who wa sixteen years
old, and made him king in the room of hi father amaziah.

26:2 He built eloth, and restor it to judah, after that the king
slept with hi fathers.

26:3 sixteen year old wa uzziah when he began to reign, and he
reign fifti and two year in jerusalem. hi mother' name also was
jecoliah of jerusalem.

26:4 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that hi father amaziah did.

26:5 and he sought god in the day of zechariah, who had understanding
in the vision of god: and as long as he sought the lord, god made him
to prosper.

26:6 and he went forth and war against the philistines, and brake
down the wall of gath, and the wall of jabneh, and the wall of ashdod,
and built citi about ashdod, and among the philistines.

26:7 and god help him against the philistines, and against the
arabian that dwelt in gurbaal, and the mehunims.

26:8 and the ammonit gave gift to uzziah: and hi name spread
abroad even to the enter in of egypt; for he strengthen himself
exceedingly.

26:9 moreov uzziah built tower in jerusalem at the corner gate, and
at the valley gate, and at the turn of the wall, and fortified
them.

26:10 also he built tower in the desert, and dig mani wells: for
h had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains:
husbandmen also, and vine dresser in the mountains, and in carmel:
for he love husbandry.

26:11 moreov uzziah had an host of fight men, that went out to
war by bands, accord to the number of their account by the hand of
jeiel the scribe and maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of hananiah,
on of the king' captains.

26:12 the whole number of the chief of the father of the mighti men
of valour were two thousand and six hundred.

26:13 and under their hand wa an army, three hundr thousand and
seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighti power, to
help the king against the enemy.

26:14 and uzziah prepar for them throughout all the host shields,
and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and sling to cast
stones.

26:15 and he made in jerusalem engines, invent by cun men, to be
on the tower and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrow and great stones
withal.

and hi name spread far abroad; for he wa marvel helped, till
h wa strong.

26:16 but when he wa strong, hi heart wa lift up to his
destruction: for he transgress against the lord hi god, and went
into the templ of the lord to burn incens upon the altar of incense.

26:17 and azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore
priest of the lord, that were valiant men: 26:18 and they withstood
uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee,
uzziah, to burn incens unto the lord, but to the priest the son of
aaron, that are consecr to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary;
for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour from
th lord god.

26:19 then uzziah wa wroth, and had a censer in hi hand to burn
incense: and while he wa wroth with the priests, the leprosi even
ros up in hi forehead befor the priest in the hous of the lord,
from besid the incens altar.

26:20 and azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, look upon
him, and, behold, he wa leprou in hi forehead, and they thrust him
out from thence; yea, himself hast also to go out, becaus the lord
had smitten him.

26:21 and uzziah the king wa a leper unto the day of hi death, and
dwelt in a sever house, be a leper; for he wa cut off from the
hous of the lord: and jotham hi son wa over the king' house,
judg the peopl of the land.

26:22 now the rest of the act of uzziah, first and last, did isaiah
th prophet, the son of amoz, write.

26:23 So uzziah slept with hi fathers, and they buri him with his
fath in the field of the burial which belong to the kings; for
they said, He is a leper: and jotham hi son reign in hi stead.

27:1 jotham wa twenti and five year old when he began to reign, and
h reign sixteen year in jerusalem. hi mother' name also was
jerushah, the daughter of zadok.

27:2 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that hi father uzziah did: howbeit he enter not
into the templ of the lord. and the peopl did yet corruptly.

27:3 He built the high gate of the hous of the lord, and on the wall
of ophel he built much.

27:4 moreov he built citi in the mountain of judah, and in the
forest he built castl and towers.

27:5 He fought also with the king of the ammonites, and prevailed
against them. and the children of ammon gave him the same year an
hundr talent of silver, and ten thousand measur of wheat, and ten
thousand of barley. So much did the children of ammon pay unto him,
both the second year, and the third.

27:6 So jotham becam mighty, becaus he prepar hi way befor the
lord hi god.

27:7 now the rest of the act of jotham, and all hi wars, and his
ways, lo, they are written in the book of the king of israel and
judah.

27:8 He wa five and twenti year old when he began to reign, and
reign sixteen year in jerusalem.

27:9 and jotham slept with hi fathers, and they buri him in the
citi of david: and ahaz hi son reign in hi stead.

28:1 ahaz wa twenti year old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen year in jerusalem: but he did not that which wa right in the
sight of the lord, like david hi father: 28:2 for he walk in the
way of the king of israel, and made also molten imag for baalim.

28:3 moreov he burnt incens in the valley of the son of hinnom, and
burnt hi children in the fire, after the abomin of the heathen
whom the lord had cast out befor the children of israel.

28:4 He sacrif also and burnt incens in the high places, and on
th hills, and under everi green tree.

28:5 wherefor the lord hi god deliv him into the hand of the
k of syria; and they smote him, and carri away a great multitude
of them captives, and brought them to damascus. and he wa also
deliv into the hand of the king of israel, who smote him with a
great slaughter.

28:6 for pekah the son of remaliah slew in judah an hundr and twenty
thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; becaus they had
forsaken the lord god of their fathers.

28:7 and zichri, a mighti man of ephraim, slew maaseiah the king's
son, and azrikam the governor of the house, and elkanah that wa next
to the king.

28:8 and the children of israel carri away captiv of their brethren
two hundr thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away
much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to samaria.

28:9 but a prophet of the lord wa there, whose name wa oded: and he
went out befor the host that came to samaria, and said unto them,
behold, becaus the lord god of your father wa wroth with judah, he
hath deliv them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage
that reacheth up unto heaven.

28:10 and now ye purpos to keep under the children of judah and
jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with
you, even with you, sin against the lord your god?  28:11 now hear me
therefore, and deliv the captiv again, which ye have taken captive
of your brethren: for the fierc wrath of the lord is upon you.

28:12 then certain of the head of the children of ephraim, azariah
th son of johanan, berechiah the son of meshillemoth, and jehizkiah
th son of shallum, and amasa the son of hadlai, stood up against them
that came from the war, 28:13 and said unto them, Ye shall not bring
in the captiv hither: for wherea we have offend against the lord
already, ye intend to add more to our sin and to our trespass: for
our trespass is great, and there is fierc wrath against israel.

28:14 So the arm men left the captiv and the spoil befor the
princ and all the congregation.

28:15 and the men which were express by name rose up, and took the
captives, and with the spoil cloth all that were nake among them,
and array them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink,
and anoint them, and carri all the feebl of them upon asses, and
brought them to jericho, the citi of palm trees, to their brethren:
then they return to samaria.

28:16 At that time did king ahaz send unto the king of assyria to
help him.

28:17 for again the edomit had come and smitten judah, and carried
away captives.

28:18 the philistin also had invad the citi of the low country,
and of the south of judah, and had taken bethshemesh, and ajalon, and
gederoth, and shocho with the villag thereof, and timnah with the
villag thereof, gimzo also and the villag thereof: and they dwelt
there.

28:19 for the lord brought judah low becaus of ahaz king of israel;
for he made judah naked, and transgress sore against the lord.

28:20 and tilgathpilnes king of assyria came unto him, and
distress him, but strengthen him not.

28:21 for ahaz took away a portion out of the hous of the lord, and
out of the hous of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the
k of assyria: but he help him not.

28:22 and in the time of hi distress did he trespass yet more against
th lord: thi is that king ahaz.

28:23 for he sacrif unto the god of damascus, which smote him:
and he said, becaus the god of the king of syria help them,
therefor will I sacrific to them, that they may help me. but they
wer the ruin of him, and of all israel.

28:24 and ahaz gather togeth the vessel of the hous of god, and
cut in piec the vessel of the hous of god, and shut up the doors
of the hous of the lord, and he made him altar in everi corner of
jerusalem.

28:25 and in everi sever citi of judah he made high place to burn
incens unto other gods, and provok to anger the lord god of his
fathers.

28:26 now the rest of hi act and of all hi ways, first and last,
behold, they are written in the book of the king of judah and israel.

28:27 and ahaz slept with hi fathers, and they buri him in the
city, even in jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres
of the king of israel: and hezekiah hi son reign in hi stead.

29:1 hezekiah began to reign when he wa five and twenti year old,
and he reign nine and twenti year in jerusalem. and hi mother's
nam wa abijah, the daughter of zechariah.

29:2 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord,
accord to all that david hi father had done.

29:3 He in the first year of hi reign, in the first month, open the
door of the hous of the lord, and repair them.

29:4 and he brought in the priest and the levites, and gather them
togeth into the east street, 29:5 and said unto them, hear me, ye
levites, sanctifi now yourselves, and sanctifi the hous of the lord
god of your fathers, and carri forth the filthi out of the holy
place.

29:6 for our father have trespassed, and done that which wa evil in
th eye of the lord our god, and have forsaken him, and have turned
away their face from the habit of the lord, and turn their
backs.

29:7 also they have shut up the door of the porch, and put out the
lamps, and have not burn incens nor offer burnt offer in the
holi place unto the god of israel.

29:8 wherefor the wrath of the lord wa upon judah and jerusalem, and
h hath deliv them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as
y see with your eyes.

29:9 for, lo, our father have fallen by the sword, and our son and
our daughter and our wive are in captiv for this.

29:10 now it is in mine heart to make a coven with the lord god of
israel, that hi fierc wrath may turn away from us.

29:11 My sons, be not now negligent: for the lord hath chosen you to
stand befor him, to serv him, and that ye should minist unto him,
and burn incense.

29:12 then the levit arose, mahath the son of amasai, and joel the
son of azariah, of the son of the kohathites: and of the son of
merari, kish the son of abdi, and azariah the son of jehalelel: and of
th gershonites; joah the son of zimmah, and eden the son of joah:
29:13 and of the son of elizaphan; shimri, and jeiel: and of the sons
of asaph; zechariah, and mattaniah: 29:14 and of the son of heman;
jehiel, and shimei: and of the son of jeduthun; shemaiah, and uzziel.

29:15 and they gather their brethren, and sanctifi themselves, and
came, accord to the command of the king, by the word of the
lord, to cleans the hous of the lord.

29:16 and the priest went into the inner part of the hous of the
lord, to cleans it, and brought out all the unclean that they
found in the templ of the lord into the court of the hous of the
lord. and the levit took it, to carri it out abroad into the brook
kidron.

29:17 now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify,
and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the lord:
so they sanctifi the hous of the lord in eight days; and in the
sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.

29:18 then they went in to hezekiah the king, and said, We have
cleans all the hous of the lord, and the altar of burnt offering,
with all the vessel thereof, and the shewbread table, with all the
vessel thereof.

29:19 moreov all the vessels, which king ahaz in hi reign did cast
away in hi transgression, have we prepar and sanctified, and,
behold, they are befor the altar of the lord.

29:20 then hezekiah the king rose early, and gather the ruler of
th city, and went up to the hous of the lord.

29:21 and they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven
lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin offer for the kingdom, and for
th sanctuary, and for judah. and he command the priest the son of
aaron to offer them on the altar of the lord.

29:22 So they kill the bullocks, and the priest receiv the blood,
and sprinkl it on the altar: likewise, when they had kill the
rams, they sprinkl the blood upon the altar: they kill also the
lambs, and they sprinkl the blood upon the altar.

29:23 and they brought forth the he goat for the sin offer before
th king and the congregation; and they laid their hand upon them:
29:24 and the priest kill them, and they made reconcili with
their blood upon the altar, to make an aton for all israel: for
th king command that the burnt offer and the sin offer should
b made for all israel.

29:25 and he set the levit in the hous of the lord with cymbals,
with psalteries, and with harps, accord to the command of
david, and of gad the king' seer, and nathan the prophet: for so was
th command of the lord by hi prophets.

29:26 and the levit stood with the instrument of david, and the
priest with the trumpets.

29:27 and hezekiah command to offer the burnt offer upon the
altar.

and when the burnt offer began, the song of the lord began also
with the trumpets, and with the instrument ordain by david king of
israel.

29:28 and all the congreg worshipped, and the singer sang, and
th trumpet sounded: and all thi continu until the burnt
off wa finished.

29:29 and when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that
wer present with him bow themselves, and worshipped.

29:30 moreov hezekiah the king and the princ command the levites
to sing prais unto the lord with the word of david, and of asaph the
seer. and they sang prais with gladness, and they bow their heads
and worshipped.

29:31 then hezekiah answer and said, now ye have consecrated
yourselv unto the lord, come near and bring sacrific and thank
off into the hous of the lord. and the congreg brought in
sacrific and thank offerings; and as mani as were of a free heart
burnt offerings.

29:32 and the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation
brought, wa threescor and ten bullocks, an hundr rams, and two
hundr lambs: all these were for a burnt offer to the lord.

29:33 and the consecr thing were six hundr oxen and three
thousand sheep.

29:34 but the priest were too few, so that they could not flay all
th burnt offerings: wherefor their brethren the levit did help
them, till the work wa ended, and until the other priest had
sanctifi themselves: for the levit were more upright in heart to
sanctifi themselv than the priests.

29:35 and also the burnt offer were in abundance, with the fat of
th peac offerings, and the drink offer for everi burnt offering.
so the servic of the hous of the lord wa set in order.

29:36 and hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that god had prepared
th people: for the thing wa done suddenly.

30:1 and hezekiah sent to all israel and judah, and wrote letter also
to ephraim and manasseh, that they should come to the hous of the
lord at jerusalem, to keep the passov unto the lord god of israel.

30:2 for the king had taken counsel, and hi princes, and all the
congreg in jerusalem, to keep the passov in the second month.

30:3 for they could not keep it at that time, becaus the priest had
not sanctifi themselv sufficiently, neither had the people
gath themselv togeth to jerusalem.

30:4 and the thing pleas the king and all the congregation.

30:5 So they establish a decre to make proclam throughout all
israel, from beersheba even to dan, that they should come to keep the
passov unto the lord god of israel at jerusalem: for they had not
don it of a long time in such sort as it wa written.

30:6 So the post went with the letter from the king and hi princes
throughout all israel and judah, and accord to the command of
th king, saying, Ye children of israel, turn again unto the lord god
of abraham, isaac, and israel, and he will return to the remnant of
you, that are escap out of the hand of the king of assyria.

30:7 and be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which
trespass against the lord god of their fathers, who therefor gave
them up to desolation, as ye see.

30:8 now be ye not stiffnecked, as your father were, but yield
yourselv unto the lord, and enter into hi sanctuary, which he hath
sanctifi for ever: and serv the lord your god, that the fierceness
of hi wrath may turn away from you.

30:9 for if ye turn again unto the lord, your brethren and your
children shall find compass befor them that lead them captive, so
that they shall come again into thi land: for the lord your god is
graci and merciful, and will not turn away hi face from you, if ye
return unto him.

30:10 So the post pass from citi to citi through the countri of
ephraim and manasseh even unto zebulun: but they laugh them to
scorn, and mock them.

30:11 nevertheless diver of asher and manasseh and of zebulun humbled
themselves, and came to jerusalem.

30:12 also in judah the hand of god wa to give them one heart to do
th command of the king and of the princes, by the word of the
lord.

30:13 and there assembl at jerusalem much peopl to keep the feast
of unleaven bread in the second month, a veri great congregation.

30:14 and they aros and took away the altar that were in jerusalem,
and all the altar for incens took they away, and cast them into the
brook kidron.

30:15 then they kill the passov on the fourteenth day of the
second month: and the priest and the levit were ashamed, and
sanctifi themselves, and brought in the burnt offer into the
hous of the lord.

30:16 and they stood in their place after their manner, accord to
th law of mose the man of god: the priest sprinkl the blood,
which they receiv of the hand of the levites.

30:17 for there were mani in the congreg that were not
sanctified: therefor the levit had the charg of the kill of the
passov for everi one that wa not clean, to sanctifi them unto the
lord.

30:18 for a multitud of the people, even mani of ephraim, and
manasseh, issachar, and zebulun, had not cleans themselves, yet did
they eat the passov otherwis than it wa written. but hezekiah
pray for them, saying, the good lord pardon everi one 30:19 that
prepareth hi heart to seek god, the lord god of hi fathers, though
h be not cleans accord to the purif of the sanctuary.

30:20 and the lord hearken to hezekiah, and heal the people.

30:21 and the children of israel that were present at jerusalem kept
th feast of unleaven bread seven day with great gladness: and the
levit and the priest prais the lord day by day, sing with loud
instru unto the lord.

30:22 and hezekiah spake comfort unto all the levit that taught
th good knowledg of the lord: and they did eat throughout the feast
seven days, offer peac offerings, and make confess to the
lord god of their fathers.

30:23 and the whole assembl took counsel to keep other seven days:
and they kept other seven day with gladness.

30:24 for hezekiah king of judah did give to the congreg a
thousand bullock and seven thousand sheep; and the princ gave to
th congreg a thousand bullock and ten thousand sheep: and a
great number of priest sanctifi themselves.

30:25 and all the congreg of judah, with the priest and the
levites, and all the congreg that came out of israel, and the
strang that came out of the land of israel, and that dwelt in
judah, rejoiced.

30:26 So there wa great joy in jerusalem: for sinc the time of
solomon the son of david king of israel there wa not the like in
jerusalem.

30:27 then the priest the levit aros and bless the people: and
their voic wa heard, and their prayer came up to hi holi dwelling
place, even unto heaven.

31:1 now when all thi wa finished, all israel that were present went
out to the citi of judah, and brake the imag in pieces, and cut
down the groves, and threw down the high place and the altar out of
al judah and benjamin, in ephraim also and manasseh, until they had
utterli destroy them all. then all the children of israel returned,
everi man to hi possession, into their own cities.

31:2 and hezekiah appoint the cours of the priest and the levites
aft their courses, everi man accord to hi service, the priests
and levit for burnt offer and for peac offerings, to minister,
and to give thanks, and to prais in the gate of the tent of the
lord.

31:3 He appoint also the king' portion of hi substanc for the
burnt offerings, to wit, for the morn and even burnt offerings,
and the burnt offer for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and
for the set feasts, as it is written in the law of the lord.

31:4 moreov he command the peopl that dwelt in jerusalem to give
th portion of the priest and the levites, that they might be
encourag in the law of the lord.

31:5 and as soon as the command came abroad, the children of
israel brought in abund the firstfruit of corn, wine, and oil,
and honey, and of all the increas of the field; and the tith of all
th brought they in abundantly.

31:6 and concern the children of israel and judah, that dwelt in
th citi of judah, they also brought in the tith of oxen and sheep,
and the tith of holi thing which were consecr unto the lord
their god, and laid them by heaps.

31:7 In the third month they began to lay the foundat of the heaps,
and finish them in the seventh month.

31:8 and when hezekiah and the princ came and saw the heaps, they
bless the lord, and hi peopl israel.

31:9 then hezekiah question with the priest and the levites
concern the heaps.

31:10 and azariah the chief priest of the hous of zadok answer him,
and said, sinc the peopl began to bring the offer into the house
of the lord, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the
lord hath bless hi people; and that which is left is thi great
store.

31:11 then hezekiah command to prepar chamber in the hous of the
lord; and they prepar them, 31:12 and brought in the offer and
th tith and the dedic thing faithfully: over which cononiah
th levit wa ruler, and shimei hi brother wa the next.

31:13 and jehiel, and azaziah, and nahath, and asahel, and jerimoth,
and jozabad, and eliel, and ismachiah, and mahath, and benaiah, were
overs under the hand of cononiah and shimei hi brother, at the
command of hezekiah the king, and azariah the ruler of the house
of god.

31:14 and kore the son of imnah the levite, the porter toward the
east, wa over the freewil offer of god, to distribut the
obl of the lord, and the most holi things.

31:15 and next him were eden, and miniamin, and jeshua, and shemaiah,
amariah, and shecaniah, in the citi of the priests, in their set
office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as
to the small: 31:16 besid their genealog of males, from three years
old and upward, even unto everi one that entereth into the hous of
th lord, hi daili portion for their servic in their charges
accord to their courses; 31:17 both to the genealog of the priests
bi the hous of their fathers, and the levit from twenti year old
and upward, in their charg by their courses; 31:18 and to the
genealog of all their littl ones, their wives, and their sons, and
their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their set office
they sanctifi themselv in holiness: 31:19 also of the son of
aaron the priests, which were in the field of the suburb of their
cities, in everi sever city, the men that were express by name, to
giv portion to all the male among the priests, and to all that were
reckon by genealog among the levites.

31:20 and thu did hezekiah throughout all judah, and wrought that
which wa good and right and truth befor the lord hi god.

31:21 and in everi work that he began in the servic of the hous of
god, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek hi god, he did
it with all hi heart, and prospered.

32:1 after these things, and the establish thereof, sennacherib
k of assyria came, and enter into judah, and encamp against the
fenc cities, and thought to win them for himself.

32:2 and when hezekiah saw that sennacherib wa come, and that he was
purpos to fight against jerusalem, 32:3 He took counsel with his
princ and hi mighti men to stop the water of the fountain which
wer without the city: and they did help him.

32:4 So there wa gather much peopl together, who stop all the
fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land,
saying, whi should the king of assyria come, and find much water?
32:5 also he strengthen himself, and built up all the wall that was
broken, and rais it up to the towers, and anoth wall without, and
repair millo in the citi of david, and made dart and shield in
abundance.

32:6 and he set captain of war over the people, and gather them
togeth to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake
comfort to them, saying, 32:7 Be strong and courageous, be not
afraid nor dismay for the king of assyria, nor for all the multitude
that is with him: for there be more with us than with him: 32:8 with
him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the lord our god to help us,
and to fight our battles. and the peopl rest themselv upon the
word of hezekiah king of judah.

32:9 after thi did sennacherib king of assyria send hi servant to
jerusalem, (but he himself laid sieg against lachish, and all his
pow with him,) unto hezekiah king of judah, and unto all judah that
wer at jerusalem, saying, 32:10 thu saith sennacherib king of
assyria, whereon do ye trust, that ye abid in the sieg in jerusalem?
32:11 doth not hezekiah persuad you to give over yourselv to die by
famin and by thirst, saying, the lord our god shall deliv us out of
th hand of the king of assyria?  32:12 hath not the same hezekiah
taken away hi high place and hi altars, and command judah and
jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship befor one altar, and burn incense
upon it?  32:13 know ye not what I and my father have done unto all
th peopl of other lands? were the god of the nation of those lands
ani way abl to deliv their land out of mine hand?  32:14 who was
ther among all the god of those nation that my father utterly
destroyed, that could deliv hi peopl out of mine hand, that your
god should be abl to deliv you out of mine hand?  32:15 now
therefor let not hezekiah deceiv you, nor persuad you on this
manner, neither yet believ him: for no god of ani nation or kingdom
wa abl to deliv hi peopl out of mine hand, and out of the hand
of my fathers: how much less shall your god deliv you out of mine
hand?  32:16 and hi servant spake yet more against the lord god, and
against hi servant hezekiah.

32:17 He wrote also letter to rail on the lord god of israel, and to
speak against him, saying, As the god of the nation of other lands
hav not deliv their peopl out of mine hand, so shall not the god
of hezekiah deliv hi peopl out of mine hand.

32:18 then they cri with a loud voic in the jews' speech unto the
peopl of jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to
troubl them; that they might take the city.

32:19 and they spake against the god of jerusalem, as against the gods
of the peopl of the earth, which were the work of the hand of man.

32:20 and for thi caus hezekiah the king, and the prophet isaiah the
son of amoz, pray and cri to heaven.

32:21 and the lord sent an angel, which cut off all the mighti men of
valour, and the leader and captain in the camp of the king of
assyria. So he return with shame of face to hi own land. and when
h wa come into the hous of hi god, they that came forth of hi own
bowel slew him there with the sword.

32:22 thu the lord save hezekiah and the inhabit of jerusalem
from the hand of sennacherib the king of assyria, and from the hand of
al other, and guid them on everi side.

32:23 and mani brought gift unto the lord to jerusalem, and presents
to hezekiah king of judah: so that he wa magnifi in the sight of
al nation from thenceforth.

32:24 In those day hezekiah wa sick to the death, and pray unto
th lord: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign.

32:25 but hezekiah render not again accord to the benefit done
unto him; for hi heart wa lift up: therefor there wa wrath upon
him, and upon judah and jerusalem.

32:26 notwithstand hezekiah humbl himself for the pride of his
heart, both he and the inhabit of jerusalem, so that the wrath of
th lord came not upon them in the day of hezekiah.

32:27 and hezekiah had exceed much rich and honour: and he made
himself treasuri for silver, and for gold, and for preciou stones,
and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant
jewels; 32:28 storehous also for the increas of corn, and wine, and
oil; and stall for all manner of beasts, and cote for flocks.

32:29 moreov he provid him cities, and possess of flock and
herd in abundance: for god had given him substanc veri much.

32:30 thi same hezekiah also stop the upper watercours of gihon,
and brought it straight down to the west side of the citi of david.
and hezekiah prosper in all hi works.

32:31 howbeit in the busi of the ambassador of the princ of
babylon, who sent unto him to enquir of the wonder that wa done in
th land, god left him, to tri him, that he might know all that wa in
hi heart.

32:32 now the rest of the act of hezekiah, and hi goodness, behold,
they are written in the vision of isaiah the prophet, the son of amoz,
and in the book of the king of judah and israel.

32:33 and hezekiah slept with hi fathers, and they buri him in the
chiefest of the sepulchr of the son of david: and all judah and the
inhabit of jerusalem did him honour at hi death. and manasseh his
son reign in hi stead.

33:1 manasseh wa twelv year old when he began to reign, and he
reign fifti and five year in jerusalem: 33:2 but did that which was
evil in the sight of the lord, like unto the abomin of the
heathen, whom the lord had cast out befor the children of israel.

33:3 for he built again the high place which hezekiah hi father had
broken down, and he rear up altar for baalim, and made groves, and
worship all the host of heaven, and serv them.

33:4 also he built altar in the hous of the lord, whereof the lord
had said, In jerusalem shall my name be for ever.

33:5 and he built altar for all the host of heaven in the two courts
of the hous of the lord.

33:6 and he caus hi children to pass through the fire in the valley
of the son of hinnom: also he observ times, and use enchantments,
and use witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with
wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the lord, to provok him
to anger.

33:7 and he set a carv image, the idol which he had made, in the
hous of god, of which god had said to david and to solomon hi son,
in thi house, and in jerusalem, which I have chosen befor all the
trib of israel, will I put my name for ever: 33:8 neither will I any
mor remov the foot of israel from out of the land which I have
appoint for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that
i have command them, accord to the whole law and the statut and
th ordin by the hand of moses.

33:9 So manasseh made judah and the inhabit of jerusalem to err,
and to do wors than the heathen, whom the lord had destroy before
th children of israel.

33:10 and the lord spake to manasseh, and to hi people: but they
would not hearken.

33:11 wherefor the lord brought upon them the captain of the host of
th king of assyria, which took manasseh among the thorns, and bound
him with fetters, and carri him to babylon.

33:12 and when he wa in affliction, he besought the lord hi god, and
humbl himself greatli befor the god of hi fathers, 33:13 and
pray unto him: and he wa intreat of him, and heard his
supplication, and brought him again to jerusalem into hi kingdom.
then manasseh knew that the lord he wa god.

33:14 now after thi he built a wall without the citi of david, on the
west side of gihon, in the valley, even to the enter in at the fish
gate, and compass about ophel, and rais it up a veri great height,
and put captain of war in all the fenc citi of judah.

33:15 and he took away the strang gods, and the idol out of the house
of the lord, and all the altar that he had built in the mount of the
hous of the lord, and in jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.

33:16 and he repair the altar of the lord, and sacrif thereon
peac offer and thank offerings, and command judah to serv the
lord god of israel.

33:17 nevertheless the peopl did sacrific still in the high places,
yet unto the lord their god only.

33:18 now the rest of the act of manasseh, and hi prayer unto his
god, and the word of the seer that spake to him in the name of the
lord god of israel, behold, they are written in the book of the kings
of israel.

33:19 hi prayer also, and how god wa intreat of him, and all his
sins, and hi trespass, and the place wherein he built high places,
and set up grove and graven images, befor he wa humbled: behold,
they are written among the say of the seers.

33:20 So manasseh slept with hi fathers, and they buri him in his
own house: and amon hi son reign in hi stead.

33:21 amon wa two and twenti year old when he began to reign, and
reign two year in jerusalem.

33:22 but he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord, as did
manasseh hi father: for amon sacrif unto all the carv images
which manasseh hi father had made, and serv them; 33:23 and humbled
not himself befor the lord, as manasseh hi father had humbled
himself; but amon trespass more and more.

33:24 and hi servant conspir against him, and slew him in hi own
house.

33:25 but the peopl of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king amon; and the peopl of the land made josiah hi son king
in hi stead.

34:1 josiah wa eight year old when he began to reign, and he reigned
in jerusalem one and thirti years.

34:2 and he did that which wa right in the sight of the lord, and
walk in the way of david hi father, and declin neither to the
right hand, nor to the left.

34:3 for in the eighth year of hi reign, while he wa yet young, he
began to seek after the god of david hi father: and in the twelfth
year he began to purg judah and jerusalem from the high places, and
th groves, and the carv images, and the molten images.

34:4 and they brake down the altar of baalim in hi presence; and the
images, that were on high abov them, he cut down; and the groves, and
th carv images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made
dust of them, and strow it upon the grave of them that had
sacrif unto them.

34:5 and he burnt the bone of the priest upon their altars, and
cleans judah and jerusalem.

34:6 and so did he in the citi of manasseh, and ephraim, and simeon,
even unto naphtali, with their mattock round about.

34:7 and when he had broken down the altar and the groves, and had
beaten the graven imag into powder, and cut down all the idols
throughout all the land of israel, he return to jerusalem.

34:8 now in the eighteenth year of hi reign, when he had purg the
land, and the house, he sent shaphan the son of azaliah, and maaseiah
th governor of the city, and joah the son of joahaz the recorder, to
repair the hous of the lord hi god.

34:9 and when they came to hilkiah the high priest, they deliv the
money that wa brought into the hous of god, which the levit that
kept the door had gather of the hand of manasseh and ephraim, and
of all the remnant of israel, and of all judah and benjamin; and they
return to jerusalem.

34:10 and they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the
oversight of the hous of the lord, and they gave it to the workmen
that wrought in the hous of the lord, to repair and amend the house:
34:11 even to the artific and builder gave they it, to buy hewn
stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the hous which the
k of judah had destroyed.

34:12 and the men did the work faithfully: and the overs of them
wer jahath and obadiah, the levites, of the son of merari; and
zechariah and meshullam, of the son of the kohathites, to set it
forward; and other of the levites, all that could skill of instruments
of musick.

34:13 also they were over the bearer of burdens, and were overseers
of all that wrought the work in ani manner of service: and of the
levit there were scribes, and officers, and porters.

34:14 and when they brought out the money that wa brought into the
hous of the lord, hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the
lord given by moses.

34:15 and hilkiah answer and said to shaphan the scribe, I have
found the book of the law in the hous of the lord. and hilkiah
deliv the book to shaphan.

34:16 and shaphan carri the book to the king, and brought the king
word back again, saying, all that wa commit to thi servants, they
do it.

34:17 and they have gather togeth the money that wa found in the
hous of the lord, and have deliv it into the hand of the
overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.

34:18 then shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, hilkiah the
priest hath given me a book. and shaphan read it befor the king.

34:19 and it came to pass, when the king had heard the word of the
law, that he rent hi clothes.

34:20 and the king command hilkiah, and ahikam the son of shaphan,
and abdon the son of micah, and shaphan the scribe, and asaiah a
serv of the king's, saying, 34:21 go, enquir of the lord for me,
and for them that are left in israel and in judah, concern the
word of the book that is found: for great is the wrath of the lord
that is pour out upon us, becaus our father have not kept the word
of the lord, to do after all that is written in thi book.

34:22 and hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to
huldah the prophetess, the wife of shallum the son of tikvath, the son
of hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in jerusalem in the
college:) and they spake to her to that effect.

34:23 and she answer them, thu saith the lord god of israel, tell
y the man that sent you to me, 34:24 thu saith the lord, behold, i
wil bring evil upon thi place, and upon the inhabit thereof,
even all the curs that are written in the book which they have read
befor the king of judah: 34:25 becaus they have forsaken me, and
hav burn incens unto other gods, that they might provok me to
ang with all the work of their hands; therefor my wrath shall be
pour out upon thi place, and shall not be quenched.

34:26 and as for the king of judah, who sent you to enquir of the
lord, so shall ye say unto him, thu saith the lord god of israel
concern the word which thou hast heard; 34:27 becaus thine heart
wa tender, and thou didst humbl thyself befor god, when thou
heardest hi word against thi place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, and humbledst thyself befor me, and didst rend thi clothes,
and weep befor me; I have even heard thee also, saith the lord.

34:28 behold, I will gather thee to thi fathers, and thou shalt be
gath to thi grave in peace, neither shall thine eye see all the
evil that I will bring upon thi place, and upon the inhabit of
th same. So they brought the king word again.

34:29 then the king sent and gather togeth all the elder of judah
and jerusalem.

34:30 and the king went up into the hous of the lord, and all the men
of judah, and the inhabit of jerusalem, and the priests, and the
levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their
ear all the word of the book of the coven that wa found in the
hous of the lord.

34:31 and the king stood in hi place, and made a coven befor the
lord, to walk after the lord, and to keep hi commandments, and his
testimonies, and hi statutes, with all hi heart, and with all his
soul, to perform the word of the coven which are written in this
book.

34:32 and he caus all that were present in jerusalem and benjamin to
stand to it. and the inhabit of jerusalem did accord to the
coven of god, the god of their fathers.

34:33 and josiah took away all the abomin out of all the
countri that pertain to the children of israel, and made all that
wer present in israel to serve, even to serv the lord their god. and
al hi day they depart not from follow the lord, the god of
their fathers.

35:1 moreov josiah kept a passov unto the lord in jerusalem: and
they kill the passov on the fourteenth day of the first month.

35:2 and he set the priest in their charges, and encourag them to
th servic of the hous of the lord, 35:3 and said unto the levites
that taught all israel, which were holi unto the lord, put the holy
ark in the hous which solomon the son of david king of israel did
build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serv now the
lord your god, and hi peopl israel, 35:4 and prepar yourselv by
th hous of your fathers, after your courses, accord to the
writ of david king of israel, and accord to the write of
solomon hi son.

35:5 and stand in the holi place accord to the divis of the
famili of the father of your brethren the people, and after the
divis of the famili of the levites.

35:6 So kill the passover, and sanctifi yourselves, and prepar your
brethren, that they may do accord to the word of the lord by the
hand of moses.

35:7 and josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lamb and kids, all
for the passov offerings, for all that were present, to the number
of thirti thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the
king' substance.

35:8 and hi princ gave willingli unto the people, to the priests,
and to the levites: hilkiah and zechariah and jehiel, ruler of the
hous of god, gave unto the priest for the passov offer two
thousand and six hundr small cattl and three hundr oxen.

35:9 conaniah also, and shemaiah and nethaneel, hi brethren, and
hashabiah and jeiel and jozabad, chief of the levites, gave unto the
levit for passov offer five thousand small cattle, and five
hundr oxen.

35:10 So the servic wa prepared, and the priest stood in their
place, and the levit in their courses, accord to the king's
commandment.

35:11 and they kill the passover, and the priest sprinkl the
blood from their hands, and the levit flay them.

35:12 and they remov the burnt offerings, that they might give
accord to the divis of the famili of the people, to offer
unto the lord, as it is written in the book of moses. and so did they
with the oxen.

35:13 and they roast the passov with fire accord to the
ordinance: but the other holi offer sod they in pots, and in
caldrons, and in pans, and divid them speedili among all the people.

35:14 and afterward they made readi for themselves, and for the
priests: becaus the priest the son of aaron were busi in offering
of burnt offer and the fat until night; therefor the levites
prepar for themselves, and for the priest the son of aaron.

35:15 and the singer the son of asaph were in their place, according
to the command of david, and asaph, and heman, and jeduthun the
king' seer; and the porter wait at everi gate; they might not
depart from their service; for their brethren the levit prepar for
them.

35:16 So all the servic of the lord wa prepar the same day, to
keep the passover, and to offer burnt offer upon the altar of the
lord, accord to the command of king josiah.

35:17 and the children of israel that were present kept the passover
at that time, and the feast of unleaven bread seven days.

35:18 and there wa no passov like to that kept in israel from the
day of samuel the prophet; neither did all the king of israel keep
such a passov as josiah kept, and the priests, and the levites, and
al judah and israel that were present, and the inhabit of
jerusalem.

35:19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of josiah wa thi passover
kept.

35:20 after all this, when josiah had prepar the temple, necho king
of egypt came up to fight against charchemish by euphrates: and josiah
w out against him.

35:21 but he sent ambassador to him, saying, what have I to do with
thee, thou king of judah? I come not against thee thi day, but
against the hous wherewith I have war: for god command me to make
haste: forbear thee from meddl with god, who is with me, that he
destroy thee not.

35:22 nevertheless josiah would not turn hi face from him, but
disguis himself, that he might fight with him, and hearken not
unto the word of necho from the mouth of god, and came to fight in
th valley of megiddo.

35:23 and the archer shot at king josiah; and the king said to his
servants, have me away; for I am sore wounded.

35:24 hi servant therefor took him out of that chariot, and put him
in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to jerusalem,
and he died, and wa buri in one of the sepulchr of hi fathers.
and all judah and jerusalem mourn for josiah.

35:25 and jeremiah lament for josiah: and all the sing men and
th sing women spake of josiah in their lament to thi day,
and made them an ordin in israel: and, behold, they are written in
th lamentations.

35:26 now the rest of the act of josiah, and hi goodness, according
to that which wa written in the law of the lord, 35:27 and hi deeds,
first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the king of
israel and judah.

36:1 then the peopl of the land took jehoahaz the son of josiah, and
mad him king in hi father' stead in jerusalem.

36:2 jehoahaz wa twenti and three year old when he began to reign,
and he reign three month in jerusalem.

36:3 and the king of egypt put him down at jerusalem, and condemned
th land in an hundr talent of silver and a talent of gold.

36:4 and the king of egypt made eliakim hi brother king over judah
and jerusalem, and turn hi name to jehoiakim. and necho took
jehoahaz hi brother, and carri him to egypt.

36:5 jehoiakim wa twenti and five year old when he began to reign,
and he reign eleven year in jerusalem: and he did that which was
evil in the sight of the lord hi god.

36:6 against him came up nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and bound him
in fetters, to carri him to babylon.

36:7 nebuchadnezzar also carri of the vessel of the hous of the
lord to babylon, and put them in hi templ at babylon.

36:8 now the rest of the act of jehoiakim, and hi abomin which
h did, and that which wa found in him, behold, they are written in
th book of the king of israel and judah: and jehoiachin hi son
reign in hi stead.

36:9 jehoiachin wa eight year old when he began to reign, and he
reign three month and ten day in jerusalem: and he did that which
wa evil in the sight of the lord.

36:10 and when the year wa expired, king nebuchadnezzar sent, and
brought him to babylon, with the goodli vessel of the hous of the
lord, and made zedekiah hi brother king over judah and jerusalem.

36:11 zedekiah wa one and twenti year old when he began to reign,
and reign eleven year in jerusalem.

36:12 and he did that which wa evil in the sight of the lord hi god,
and humbl not himself befor jeremiah the prophet speak from the
mouth of the lord.

36:13 and he also rebel against king nebuchadnezzar, who had made
him swear by god: but he stiffen hi neck, and harden hi heart
from turn unto the lord god of israel.

36:14 moreov all the chief of the priests, and the people,
transgress veri much after all the abomin of the heathen; and
pollut the hous of the lord which he had hallow in jerusalem.

36:15 and the lord god of their father sent to them by his
messengers, rise up betimes, and sending; becaus he had compassion
on hi people, and on hi dwell place: 36:16 but they mock the
messeng of god, and despis hi words, and misus hi prophets,
until the wrath of the lord aros against hi people, till there was
no remedy.

36:17 therefor he brought upon them the king of the chaldees, who
slew their young men with the sword in the hous of their sanctuary,
and had no compass upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that
stoop for age: he gave them all into hi hand.

36:18 and all the vessel of the hous of god, great and small, and
th treasur of the hous of the lord, and the treasur of the king,
and of hi princes; all these he brought to babylon.

36:19 and they burnt the hous of god, and brake down the wall of
jerusalem, and burnt all the palac thereof with fire, and destroyed
al the goodli vessel thereof.

36:20 and them that had escap from the sword carri he away to
babylon; where they were servant to him and hi son until the reign
of the kingdom of persia: 36:21 To fulfil the word of the lord by the
mouth of jeremiah, until the land had enjoy her sabbaths: for as
long as she lay desol she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescor and
ten years.

36:22 now in the first year of cyru king of persia, that the word of
th lord spoken by the mouth of jeremiah might be accomplished, the
lord stir up the spirit of cyru king of persia, that he made a
proclam throughout all hi kingdom, and put it also in writing,
saying, 36:23 thu saith cyru king of persia, all the kingdom of the
earth hath the lord god of heaven given me; and he hath charg me to
build him an hous in jerusalem, which is in judah. who is there among
y of all hi people?  the lord hi god be with him, and let him go up.




ezra


1:1 now in the first year of cyru king of persia, that the word of
th lord by the mouth of jeremiah might be fulfilled, the lord stirred
up the spirit of cyru king of persia, that he made a proclamation
throughout all hi kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, 1:2
thu saith cyru king of persia, the lord god of heaven hath given me
al the kingdom of the earth; and he hath charg me to build him an
hous at jerusalem, which is in judah.

1:3 who is there among you of all hi people? hi god be with him, and
let him go up to jerusalem, which is in judah, and build the hous of
th lord god of israel, (he is the god,) which is in jerusalem.

1:4 and whosoev remaineth in ani place where he sojourneth, let the
men of hi place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods,
and with beasts, besid the freewil offer for the hous of god
that is in jerusalem.

1:5 then rose up the chief of the father of judah and benjamin, and
th priests, and the levites, with all them whose spirit god had
raised, to go up to build the hous of the lord which is in jerusalem.

1:6 and all they that were about them strengthen their hand with
vessel of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with
preci things, besid all that wa willingli offered.

1:7 also cyru the king brought forth the vessel of the hous of the
lord, which nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of jerusalem, and had
put them in the hous of hi gods; 1:8 even those did cyru king of
persia bring forth by the hand of mithredath the treasurer, and
numb them unto sheshbazzar, the princ of judah.

1:9 and thi is the number of them: thirti charger of gold, a
thousand charger of silver, nine and twenti knives, 1:10 thirty
bason of gold, silver bason of a second sort four hundr and ten,
and other vessel a thousand.

1:11 all the vessel of gold and of silver were five thousand and four
hundred. all these did sheshbazzar bring up with them of the captivity
that were brought up from babylon unto jerusalem.

2:1 now these are the children of the provinc that went up out of the
captivity, of those which had been carri away, whom nebuchadnezzar
th king of babylon had carri away unto babylon, and came again unto
jerusalem and judah, everi one unto hi city; 2:2 which came with
zerubbabel: jeshua, nehemiah, seraiah, reelaiah, mordecai, bilshan,
mizpar, bigvai, rehum, baanah. the number of the men of the peopl of
israel: 2:3 the children of parosh, two thousand an hundr seventy
and two.

2:4 the children of shephatiah, three hundr seventi and two.

2:5 the children of arah, seven hundr seventi and five.

2:6 the children of pahathmoab, of the children of jeshua and joab,
two thousand eight hundr and twelve.

2:7 the children of elam, a thousand two hundr fifti and four.

2:8 the children of zattu, nine hundr forti and five.

2:9 the children of zaccai, seven hundr and threescore.

2:10 the children of bani, six hundr forti and two.

2:11 the children of bebai, six hundr twenti and three.

2:12 the children of azgad, a thousand two hundr twenti and two.

2:13 the children of adonikam, six hundr sixti and six.

2:14 the children of bigvai, two thousand fifti and six.

2:15 the children of adin, four hundr fifti and four.

2:16 the children of ater of hezekiah, nineti and eight.

2:17 the children of bezai, three hundr twenti and three.

2:18 the children of jorah, an hundr and twelve.

2:19 the children of hashum, two hundr twenti and three.

2:20 the children of gibbar, nineti and five.

2:21 the children of bethlehem, an hundr twenti and three.

2:22 the men of netophah, fifti and six.

2:23 the men of anathoth, an hundr twenti and eight.

2:24 the children of azmaveth, forti and two.

2:25 the children of kirjatharim, chephirah, and beeroth, seven
hundr and forti and three.

2:26 the children of ramah and gaba, six hundr twenti and one.

2:27 the men of michmas, an hundr twenti and two.

2:28 the men of bethel and ai, two hundr twenti and three.

2:29 the children of nebo, fifti and two.

2:30 the children of magbish, an hundr fifti and six.

2:31 the children of the other elam, a thousand two hundr fifti and
four.

2:32 the children of harim, three hundr and twenty.

2:33 the children of lod, hadid, and ono, seven hundr twenti and
five.

2:34 the children of jericho, three hundr forti and five.

2:35 the children of senaah, three thousand and six hundr and
thirty.

2:36 the priests: the children of jedaiah, of the hous of jeshua,
nin hundr seventi and three.

2:37 the children of immer, a thousand fifti and two.

2:38 the children of pashur, a thousand two hundr forti and seven.

2:39 the children of harim, a thousand and seventeen.

2:40 the levites: the children of jeshua and kadmiel, of the children
of hodaviah, seventi and four.

2:41 the singers: the children of asaph, an hundr twenti and eight.

2:42 the children of the porters: the children of shallum, the
children of ater, the children of talmon, the children of akkub, the
children of hatita, the children of shobai, in all an hundr thirty
and nine.

2:43 the nethinims: the children of ziha, the children of hasupha, the
children of tabbaoth, 2:44 the children of keros, the children of
siaha, the children of padon, 2:45 the children of lebanah, the
children of hagabah, the children of akkub, 2:46 the children of
hagab, the children of shalmai, the children of hanan, 2:47 the
children of giddel, the children of gahar, the children of reaiah,
2:48 the children of rezin, the children of nekoda, the children of
gazzam, 2:49 the children of uzza, the children of paseah, the
children of besai, 2:50 the children of asnah, the children of
mehunim, the children of nephusim, 2:51 the children of bakbuk, the
children of hakupha, the children of harhur, 2:52 the children of
bazluth, the children of mehida, the children of harsha, 2:53 the
children of barkos, the children of sisera, the children of thamah,
2:54 the children of neziah, the children of hatipha.

2:55 the children of solomon' servants: the children of sotai, the
children of sophereth, the children of peruda, 2:56 the children of
jaalah, the children of darkon, the children of giddel, 2:57 the
children of shephatiah, the children of hattil, the children of
pochereth of zebaim, the children of ami.

2:58 all the nethinims, and the children of solomon' servants, were
thre hundr nineti and two.

2:59 and these were they which went up from telmelah, telharsa,
cherub, addan, and immer: but they could not shew their father's
house, and their seed, whether they were of israel: 2:60 the children
of delaiah, the children of tobiah, the children of nekoda, six
hundr fifti and two.

2:61 and of the children of the priests: the children of habaiah, the
children of koz, the children of barzillai; which took a wife of the
daught of barzillai the gileadite, and wa call after their name:
2:62 these sought their regist among those that were reckon by
genealogy, but they were not found: therefor were they, as polluted,
put from the priesthood.

2:63 and the tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the
most holi things, till there stood up a priest with urim and with
thummim.

2:64 the whole congreg togeth wa forti and two thousand three
hundr and threescore, 2:65 besid their servant and their maids, of
whom there were seven thousand three hundr thirti and seven: and
ther were among them two hundr sing men and sing women.

2:66 their hors were seven hundr thirti and six; their mules, two
hundr forti and five; 2:67 their camels, four hundr thirti and
five; their asses, six thousand seven hundr and twenty.

2:68 and some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house
of the lord which is at jerusalem, offer freeli for the hous of god
to set it up in hi place: 2:69 they gave after their abil unto the
treasur of the work threescor and one thousand dram of gold, and
fiv thousand pound of silver, and one hundr priests' garments.

2:70 So the priests, and the levites, and some of the people, and the
singers, and the porters, and the nethinims, dwelt in their cities,
and all israel in their cities.

3:1 and when the seventh month wa come, and the children of israel
wer in the cities, the peopl gather themselv togeth as one man
to jerusalem.

3:2 then stood up jeshua the son of jozadak, and hi brethren the
priests, and zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and hi brethren, and
build the altar of the god of israel, to offer burnt offerings
thereon, as it is written in the law of mose the man of god.

3:3 and they set the altar upon hi bases; for fear wa upon them
becaus of the peopl of those countries: and they offer burnt
off thereon unto the lord, even burnt offer morn and
evening.

3:4 they kept also the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and
off the daili burnt offer by number, accord to the custom,
a the duti of everi day required; 3:5 and afterward offer the
continu burnt offering, both of the new moons, and of all the set
feast of the lord that were consecrated, and of everi one that
willingli offer a freewil offer unto the lord.

3:6 from the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt
off unto the lord. but the foundat of the templ of the lord
wa not yet laid.

3:7 they gave money also unto the masons, and to the carpenters; and
meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of zidon, and to them of tyre, to
br cedar tree from lebanon to the sea of joppa, accord to the
grant that they had of cyru king of persia.

3:8 now in the second year of their come unto the hous of god at
jerusalem, in the second month, began zerubbabel the son of shealtiel,
and jeshua the son of jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the
priest and the levites, and all they that were come out of the
capt unto jerusalem; and appoint the levites, from twenti years
old and upward, to set forward the work of the hous of the lord.

3:9 then stood jeshua with hi son and hi brethren, kadmiel and his
sons, the son of judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the
hous of god: the son of henadad, with their son and their brethren
th levites.

3:10 and when the builder laid the foundat of the templ of the
lord, they set the priest in their apparel with trumpets, and the
levit the son of asaph with cymbals, to prais the lord, after the
ordin of david king of israel.

3:11 and they sang togeth by cours in prais and give thanks
unto the lord; becaus he is good, for hi merci endureth for ever
toward israel.

and all the peopl shout with a great shout, when they prais the
lord, becaus the foundat of the hous of the lord wa laid.

3:12 but mani of the priest and levit and chief of the fathers, who
wer ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation
of thi hous wa laid befor their eyes, wept with a loud voice; and
mani shout aloud for joy: 3:13 So that the peopl could not discern
th nois of the shout of joy from the nois of the weep of the
people: for the peopl shout with a loud shout, and the nois was
heard afar off.

4:1 now when the adversari of judah and benjamin heard that the
children of the captiv build the templ unto the lord god of
israel; 4:2 then they came to zerubbabel, and to the chief of the
fathers, and said unto them, let us build with you: for we seek your
god, as ye do; and we do sacrific unto him sinc the day of
esarhaddon king of assur, which brought us up hither.

4:3 but zerubbabel, and jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the
fath of israel, said unto them, Ye have noth to do with us to
build an hous unto our god; but we ourselv togeth will build unto
th lord god of israel, as king cyru the king of persia hath
command us.

4:4 then the peopl of the land weaken the hand of the peopl of
judah, and troubl them in building, 4:5 and hire counsellors
against them, to frustrat their purpose, all the day of cyru king
of persia, even until the reign of dariu king of persia.

4:6 and in the reign of ahasuerus, in the begin of hi reign,
wrot they unto him an accus against the inhabit of judah and
jerusalem.

4:7 and in the day of artaxerx wrote bishlam, mithredath, tabeel,
and the rest of their companions, unto artaxerx king of persia; and
th write of the letter wa written in the syrian tongue, and
interpret in the syrian tongue.

4:8 rehum the chancellor and shimshai the scribe wrote a letter
against jerusalem to artaxerx the king in thi sort: 4:9 then wrote
rehum the chancellor, and shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their
companions; the dinaites, the apharsathchites, the tarpelites, the
apharsites, the archevites, the babylonians, the susanchites, the
dehavites, and the elamites, 4:10 and the rest of the nation whom the
great and nobl asnapp brought over, and set in the citi of
samaria, and the rest that are on thi side the river, and at such a
time.

4:11 thi is the copi of the letter that they sent unto him, even unto
artaxerx the king; thi servant the men on thi side the river, and
at such a time.

4:12 Be it known unto the king, that the jew which came up from thee
to us are come unto jerusalem, build the rebelli and the bad
city, and have set up the wall thereof, and join the foundations.

4:13 Be it known now unto the king, that, if thi citi be builded, and
th wall set up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute, and
custom, and so thou shalt endamag the revenu of the kings.

4:14 now becaus we have mainten from the king' palace, and it
wa not meet for us to see the king' dishonour, therefor have we
sent and certifi the king; 4:15 that search may be made in the book
of the record of thi fathers: so shalt thou find in the book of the
records, and know that thi citi is a rebelli city, and hurtful
unto king and provinces, and that they have move sedit within the
sam of old time: for which caus wa thi citi destroyed.

4:16 We certifi the king that, if thi citi be build again, and the
wal thereof set up, by thi mean thou shalt have no portion on this
sid the river.

4:17 then sent the king an answer unto rehum the chancellor, and to
shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companion that dwell in
samaria, and unto the rest beyond the river, peace, and at such a
time.

4:18 the letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainli read before
me.

4:19 and I commanded, and search hath been made, and it is found that
thi citi of old time hath made insurrect against kings, and that
rebellion and sedit have been made therein.

4:20 there have been mighti king also over jerusalem, which have
rul over all countri beyond the river; and toll, tribute, and
custom, wa paid unto them.

4:21 give ye now command to caus these men to cease, and that
thi citi be not builded, until anoth command shall be given
from me.

4:22 take heed now that ye fail not to do this: whi should damag grow
to the hurt of the kings?  4:23 now when the copi of king artaxerxes'
lett wa read befor rehum, and shimshai the scribe, and their
companions, they went up in hast to jerusalem unto the jews, and made
them to ceas by forc and power.

4:24 then ceas the work of the hous of god which is at jerusalem.
so it ceas unto the second year of the reign of dariu king of
persia.

5:1 then the prophets, haggai the prophet, and zechariah the son of
iddo, prophesi unto the jew that were in judah and jerusalem in the
nam of the god of israel, even unto them.

5:2 then rose up zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and jeshua the son
of jozadak, and began to build the hous of god which is at jerusalem:
and with them were the prophet of god help them.

5:3 At the same time came to them tatnai, governor on thi side the
river, and shetharboznai and their companions, and said thu unto
them, who hath command you to build thi house, and to make up this
wall?  5:4 then said we unto them after thi manner, what are the
nam of the men that make thi building?  5:5 but the eye of their
god wa upon the elder of the jews, that they could not caus them to
cease, till the matter came to darius: and then they return answer
bi letter concern thi matter.

5:6 the copi of the letter that tatnai, governor on thi side the
river, and shetharboznai and hi companion the apharsachites, which
wer on thi side the river, sent unto dariu the king: 5:7 they sent
a letter unto him, wherein wa written thus; unto dariu the king, all
peace.

5:8 Be it known unto the king, that we went into the provinc of
judea, to the hous of the great god, which is build with great
stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and thi work goeth fast on,
and prospereth in their hands.

5:9 then ask we those elders, and said unto them thus, who commanded
y to build thi house, and to make up these walls?  5:10 We asked
their name also, to certifi thee, that we might write the name of
th men that were the chief of them.

5:11 and thu they return us answer, saying, We are the servant of
th god of heaven and earth, and build the hous that wa builded
thes mani year ago, which a great king of israel build and set up.

5:12 but after that our father had provok the god of heaven unto
wrath, he gave them into the hand of nebuchadnezzar the king of
babylon, the chaldean, who destroy thi house, and carri the
peopl away into babylon.

5:13 but in the first year of cyru the king of babylon the same king
cyru made a decre to build thi hous of god.

5:14 and the vessel also of gold and silver of the hous of god,
which nebuchadnezzar took out of the templ that wa in jerusalem, and
brought them into the templ of babylon, those did cyru the king take
out of the templ of babylon, and they were deliv unto one, whose
nam wa sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor; 5:15 and said unto
him, take these vessels, go, carri them into the templ that is in
jerusalem, and let the hous of god be build in hi place.

5:16 then came the same sheshbazzar, and laid the foundat of the
hous of god which is in jerusalem: and sinc that time even until now
hath it been in building, and yet it is not finished.

5:17 now therefore, if it seem good to the king, let there be search
mad in the king' treasur house, which is there at babylon, whether
it be so, that a decre wa made of cyru the king to build thi house
of god at jerusalem, and let the king send hi pleasur to us
concern thi matter.

6:1 then dariu the king made a decree, and search wa made in the
hous of the rolls, where the treasur were laid up in babylon.

6:2 and there wa found at achmetha, in the palac that is in the
provinc of the medes, a roll, and therein wa a record thu written:
6:3 In the first year of cyru the king the same cyru the king made a
decre concern the hous of god at jerusalem, let the hous be
builded, the place where they offer sacrifices, and let the
found thereof be strongli laid; the height thereof threescore
cubits, and the breadth thereof threescor cubits; 6:4 with three rows
of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the expens be
given out of the king' house: 6:5 and also let the golden and silver
vessel of the hous of god, which nebuchadnezzar took forth out of
th templ which is at jerusalem, and brought unto babylon, be
restored, and brought again unto the templ which is at jerusalem,
everi one to hi place, and place them in the hous of god.

6:6 now therefore, tatnai, governor beyond the river, shetharboznai,
and your companion the apharsachites, which are beyond the river, be
y far from thence: 6:7 let the work of thi hous of god alone; let
th governor of the jew and the elder of the jew build thi house
of god in hi place.

6:8 moreov I make a decre what ye shall do to the elder of these
jew for the build of thi hous of god: that of the king' goods,
even of the tribut beyond the river, forthwith expens be given unto
thes men, that they be not hindered.

6:9 and that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams,
and lambs, for the burnt offer of the god of heaven, wheat, salt,
wine, and oil, accord to the appoint of the priest which are
at jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail: 6:10 that
they may offer sacrific of sweet savour unto the god of heaven, and
pray for the life of the king, and of hi sons.

6:11 also I have made a decree, that whosoev shall alter thi word,
let timber be pull down from hi house, and be set up, let him be
hang thereon; and let hi hous be made a dunghil for this.

6:12 and the god that hath caus hi name to dwell there destroy all
k and people, that shall put to their hand to alter and to destroy
thi hous of god which is at jerusalem. I dariu have made a decree;
let it be done with speed.

6:13 then tatnai, governor on thi side the river, shetharboznai, and
their companions, accord to that which dariu the king had sent, so
they did speedily.

6:14 and the elder of the jew builded, and they prosper through
th prophesi of haggai the prophet and zechariah the son of iddo.
and they builded, and finish it, accord to the command of the
god of israel, and accord to the command of cyrus, and darius,
and artaxerx king of persia.

6:15 and thi hous wa finish on the third day of the month adar,
which wa in the sixth year of the reign of dariu the king.

6:16 and the children of israel, the priests, and the levites, and the
rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedic of this
hous of god with joy.

6:17 and offer at the dedic of thi hous of god an hundred
bullocks, two hundr rams, four hundr lambs; and for a sin offering
for all israel, twelv he goats, accord to the number of the tribes
of israel.

6:18 and they set the priest in their divisions, and the levit in
their courses, for the servic of god, which is at jerusalem; as it is
written in the book of moses.

6:19 and the children of the captiv kept the passov upon the
fourteenth day of the first month.

6:20 for the priest and the levit were purifi together, all of
them were pure, and kill the passov for all the children of the
captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.

6:21 and the children of israel, which were come again out of
captivity, and all such as had separ themselv unto them from the
filthi of the heathen of the land, to seek the lord god of israel,
did eat, 6:22 and kept the feast of unleaven bread seven day with
joy: for the lord had made them joyful, and turn the heart of the
k of assyria unto them, to strengthen their hand in the work of
th hous of god, the god of israel.

7:1 now after these things, in the reign of artaxerx king of persia,
ezra the son of seraiah, the son of azariah, the son of hilkiah, 7:2
the son of shallum, the son of zadok, the son of ahitub, 7:3 the son
of amariah, the son of azariah, the son of meraioth, 7:4 the son of
zerahiah, the son of uzzi, the son of bukki, 7:5 the son of abishua,
th son of phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the chief
priest: 7:6 thi ezra went up from babylon; and he wa a readi scribe
in the law of moses, which the lord god of israel had given: and the
k grant him all hi request, accord to the hand of the lord
hi god upon him.

7:7 and there went up some of the children of israel, and of the
priests, and the levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the
nethinims, unto jerusalem, in the seventh year of artaxerx the king.

7:8 and he came to jerusalem in the fifth month, which wa in the
seventh year of the king.

7:9 for upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from
babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month came he to jerusalem,
accord to the good hand of hi god upon him.

7:10 for ezra had prepar hi heart to seek the law of the lord, and
to do it, and to teach in israel statut and judgments.

7:11 now thi is the copi of the letter that the king artaxerx gave
unto ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe of the word of the
command of the lord, and of hi statut to israel.

7:12 artaxerxes, king of kings, unto ezra the priest, a scribe of the
law of the god of heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time.

7:13 I make a decree, that all they of the peopl of israel, and of
hi priest and levites, in my realm, which are mind of their own
freewil to go up to jerusalem, go with thee.

7:14 forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of hi seven
counsellors, to enquir concern judah and jerusalem, accord to
th law of thi god which is in thine hand; 7:15 and to carri the
silv and gold, which the king and hi counsellor have freely
off unto the god of israel, whose habit is in jerusalem, 7:16
and all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province
of babylon, with the freewil offer of the people, and of the
priests, offer willingli for the hous of their god which is in
jerusalem: 7:17 that thou mayest buy speedili with thi money
bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat offer and their drink
offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the hous of your god
which is in jerusalem.

7:18 and whatsoev shall seem good to thee, and to thi brethren, to
do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will of
your god.

7:19 the vessel also that are given thee for the servic of the house
of thi god, those deliv thou befor the god of jerusalem.

7:20 and whatsoev more shall be need for the hous of thi god,
which thou shalt have occas to bestow, bestow it out of the king's
treasur house.

7:21 and I, even I artaxerx the king, do make a decre to all the
treasur which are beyond the river, that whatsoev ezra the
priest, the scribe of the law of the god of heaven, shall requir of
you, it be done speedily, 7:22 unto an hundr talent of silver, and
to an hundr measur of wheat, and to an hundr bath of wine, and
to an hundr bath of oil, and salt without prescrib how much.

7:23 whatsoev is command by the god of heaven, let it be
dilig done for the hous of the god of heaven: for whi should
ther be wrath against the realm of the king and hi sons?  7:24 also
w certifi you, that touch ani of the priest and levites, singers,
porters, nethinims, or minist of thi hous of god, it shall not be
law to impos toll, tribute, or custom, upon them.

7:25 and thou, ezra, after the wisdom of thi god, that is in thine
hand, set magistr and judges, which may judg all the peopl that
ar beyond the river, all such as know the law of thi god; and teach
y them that know them not.

7:26 and whosoev will not do the law of thi god, and the law of the
king, let judgment be execut speedili upon him, whether it be unto
death, or to banishment, or to confisc of goods, or to
imprisonment.

7:27 bless be the lord god of our fathers, which hath put such a
th as thi in the king' heart, to beautifi the hous of the lord
which is in jerusalem: 7:28 and hath extend merci unto me befor the
king, and hi counsellors, and befor all the king' mighti princes.
and I wa strengthen as the hand of the lord my god wa upon me, and
i gather togeth out of israel chief men to go up with me.

8:1 these are now the chief of their fathers, and thi is the
genealog of them that went up with me from babylon, in the reign of
artaxerx the king.

8:2 Of the son of phinehas; gershom: of the son of ithamar; daniel:
of the son of david; hattush.

8:3 Of the son of shechaniah, of the son of pharosh; zechariah: and
with him were reckon by genealog of the male an hundr and fifty.

8:4 Of the son of pahathmoab; elihoenai the son of zerahiah, and with
him two hundr males.

8:5 Of the son of shechaniah; the son of jahaziel, and with him three
hundr males.

8:6 Of the son also of adin; ebe the son of jonathan, and with him
fifti males.

8:7 and of the son of elam; jeshaiah the son of athaliah, and with
him seventi males.

8:8 and of the son of shephatiah; zebadiah the son of michael, and
with him fourscor males.

8:9 Of the son of joab; obadiah the son of jehiel, and with him two
hundr and eighteen males.

8:10 and of the son of shelomith; the son of josiphiah, and with him
an hundr and threescor males.

8:11 and of the son of bebai; zechariah the son of bebai, and with
him twenti and eight males.

8:12 and of the son of azgad; johanan the son of hakkatan, and with
him an hundr and ten males.

8:13 and of the last son of adonikam, whose name are these,
eliphelet, jeiel, and shemaiah, and with them threescor males.

8:14 Of the son also of bigvai; uthai, and zabbud, and with them
seventi males.

8:15 and I gather them togeth to the river that runneth to ahava;
and there abod we in tent three days: and I view the people, and
th priests, and found there none of the son of levi.

8:16 then sent I for eliezer, for ariel, for shemaiah, and for
elnathan, and for jarib, and for elnathan, and for nathan, and for
zechariah, and for meshullam, chief men; also for joiarib, and for
elnathan, men of understanding.

8:17 and I sent them with command unto iddo the chief at the place
casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto iddo, and to his
brethren the nethinims, at the place casiphia, that they should bring
unto us minist for the hous of our god.

8:18 and by the good hand of our god upon us they brought us a man of
understanding, of the son of mahli, the son of levi, the son of
israel; and sherebiah, with hi son and hi brethren, eighteen; 8:19
and hashabiah, and with him jeshaiah of the son of merari, his
brethren and their sons, twenty; 8:20 also of the nethinims, whom
david and the princ had appoint for the servic of the levites,
two hundr and twenti nethinims: all of them were express by name.

8:21 then I proclaim a fast there, at the river of ahava, that we
might afflict ourselv befor our god, to seek of him a right way for
us, and for our littl ones, and for all our substance.

8:22 for I wa asham to requir of the king a band of soldier and
horsemen to help us against the enemi in the way: becaus we had
spoken unto the king, saying, the hand of our god is upon all them for
good that seek him; but hi power and hi wrath is against all them
that forsak him.

8:23 So we fast and besought our god for this: and he wa intreated
of us.

8:24 then I separ twelv of the chief of the priests, sherebiah,
hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them, 8:25 and weigh unto
them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, even the offer of
th hous of our god, which the king, and hi counsellors, and his
lords, and all israel there present, had offered: 8:26 I even weighed
unto their hand six hundr and fifti talent of silver, and silver
vessel an hundr talents, and of gold an hundr talents; 8:27 also
twenti bason of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessel of fine
copper, preciou as gold.

8:28 and I said unto them, Ye are holi unto the lord; the vessel are
holi also; and the silver and the gold are a freewil offer unto
th lord god of your fathers.

8:29 watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them befor the chief of
th priest and the levites, and chief of the father of israel, at
jerusalem, in the chamber of the hous of the lord.

8:30 So took the priest and the levit the weight of the silver, and
th gold, and the vessels, to bring them to jerusalem unto the house
of our god.

8:31 then we depart from the river of ahava on the twelfth day of
th first month, to go unto jerusalem: and the hand of our god was
upon us, and he deliv us from the hand of the enemy, and of such
a lay in wait by the way.

8:32 and we came to jerusalem, and abod there three days.

8:33 now on the fourth day wa the silver and the gold and the vessels
weigh in the hous of our god by the hand of meremoth the son of
uriah the priest; and with him wa eleazar the son of phinehas; and
with them wa jozabad the son of jeshua, and noadiah the son of
binnui, levites; 8:34 By number and by weight of everi one: and all
th weight wa written at that time.

8:35 also the children of those that had been carri away, which were
com out of the captivity, offer burnt offer unto the god of
israel, twelv bullock for all israel, nineti and six rams, seventy
and seven lambs, twelv he goat for a sin offering: all thi wa a
burnt offer unto the lord.

8:36 and they deliv the king' commiss unto the king's
lieutenants, and to the governor on thi side the river: and they
furth the people, and the hous of god.

9:1 now when these thing were done, the princ came to me, saying,
th peopl of israel, and the priests, and the levites, have not
separ themselv from the peopl of the lands, do accord to
their abominations, even of the canaanites, the hittites, the
perizzites, the jebusites, the ammonites, the moabites, the egyptians,
and the amorites.

9:2 for they have taken of their daughter for themselves, and for
their sons: so that the holi seed have mingl themselv with the
peopl of those lands: yea, the hand of the princ and ruler hath
been chief in thi trespass.

9:3 and when I heard thi thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and
pluck off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down
astonied.

9:4 then were assembl unto me everi one that trembl at the words
of the god of israel, becaus of the transgress of those that had
been carri away; and I sat astoni until the even sacrifice.

9:5 and at the even sacrific I aros up from my heaviness; and
hav rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread
out my hand unto the lord my god, 9:6 and said, O my god, I am
asham and blush to lift up my face to thee, my god: for our
iniqu are increas over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heavens.

9:7 sinc the day of our father have we been in a great trespass
unto thi day; and for our iniqu have we, our kings, and our
priests, been deliv into the hand of the king of the lands, to
th sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confus of face, as
it is thi day.

9:8 and now for a littl space grace hath been shew from the lord
our god, to leav us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his
holi place, that our god may lighten our eyes, and give us a little
reviv in our bondage.

9:9 for we were bondmen; yet our god hath not forsaken us in our
bondage, but hath extend merci unto us in the sight of the king of
persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the hous of our god, and to
repair the desol thereof, and to give us a wall in judah and in
jerusalem.

9:10 and now, O our god, what shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thi commandments, 9:11 which thou hast command by thy
serv the prophets, saying, the land, unto which ye go to possess
it, is an unclean land with the filthi of the peopl of the lands,
with their abominations, which have fill it from one end to another
with their uncleanness.

9:12 now therefor give not your daughter unto their sons, neither
tak their daughter unto your sons, nor seek their peac or their
wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land,
and leav it for an inherit to your children for ever.

9:13 and after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for
our great trespass, see that thou our god hast punish us less
than our iniqu deserve, and hast given us such deliver as
this; 9:14 should we again break thi commandments, and join in
affin with the peopl of these abominations? wouldest not thou be
angri with us till thou hadst consum us, so that there should be no
remn nor escaping?  9:15 O lord god of israel, thou art righteous:
for we remain yet escaped, as it is thi day: behold, we are before
the in our trespasses: for we cannot stand befor thee becaus of
this.

10:1 now when ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed, weep and
cast himself down befor the hous of god, there assembl unto him
out of israel a veri great congreg of men and women and children:
for the peopl wept veri sore.

10:2 and shechaniah the son of jehiel, one of the son of elam,
answ and said unto ezra, We have trespass against our god, and
hav taken strang wive of the peopl of the land: yet now there is
hop in israel concern thi thing.

10:3 now therefor let us make a coven with our god to put away all
th wives, and such as are born of them, accord to the counsel of
mi lord, and of those that trembl at the command of our god; and
let it be done accord to the law.

10:4 arise; for thi matter belongeth unto thee: we also will be with
thee: be of good courage, and do it.

10:5 then aros ezra, and made the chief priests, the levites, and all
israel, to swear that they should do accord to thi word. and they
sware.

10:6 then ezra rose up from befor the hous of god, and went into the
chamb of johanan the son of eliashib: and when he came thither, he
did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourn becaus of the
transgress of them that had been carri away.

10:7 and they made proclam throughout judah and jerusalem unto
al the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves
togeth unto jerusalem; 10:8 and that whosoev would not come within
thre days, accord to the counsel of the princ and the elders,
al hi substanc should be forfeited, and himself separ from the
congreg of those that had been carri away.

10:9 then all the men of judah and benjamin gather themselves
togeth unto jerusalem within three days. It wa the ninth month, on
th twentieth day of the month; and all the peopl sat in the street
of the hous of god, trembl becaus of thi matter, and for the
great rain.

10:10 and ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them, Ye have
transgressed, and have taken strang wives, to increas the trespass
of israel.

10:11 now therefor make confess unto the lord god of your fathers,
and do hi pleasure: and separ yourselv from the peopl of the
land, and from the strang wives.

10:12 then all the congreg answer and said with a loud voice,
a thou hast said, so must we do.

10:13 but the peopl are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we
ar not abl to stand without, neither is thi a work of one day or
two: for we are mani that have transgress in thi thing.

10:14 let now our ruler of all the congreg stand, and let all
them which have taken strang wive in our citi come at appointed
times, and with them the elder of everi city, and the judg thereof,
until the fierc wrath of our god for thi matter be turn from us.

10:15 onli jonathan the son of asahel and jahaziah the son of tikvah
wer employ about thi matter: and meshullam and shabbethai the
levit help them.

10:16 and the children of the captiv did so. and ezra the priest,
with certain chief of the fathers, after the hous of their fathers,
and all of them by their names, were separated, and sat down in the
first day of the tenth month to examin the matter.

10:17 and they made an end with all the men that had taken strange
w by the first day of the first month.

10:18 and among the son of the priest there were found that had
taken strang wives: namely, of the son of jeshua the son of jozadak,
and hi brethren; maaseiah, and eliezer, and jarib, and gedaliah.

10:19 and they gave their hand that they would put away their wives;
and be guilty, they offer a ram of the flock for their trespass.

10:20 and of the son of immer; hanani, and zebadiah.

10:21 and of the son of harim; maaseiah, and elijah, and shemaiah,
and jehiel, and uzziah.

10:22 and of the son of pashur; elioenai, maaseiah, ishmael,
nethaneel, jozabad, and elasah.

10:23 also of the levites; jozabad, and shimei, and kelaiah, (the same
i kelita,) pethahiah, judah, and eliezer.

10:24 Of the singer also; eliashib: and of the porters; shallum, and
telem, and uri.

10:25 moreov of israel: of the son of parosh; ramiah, and jeziah,
and malchiah, and miamin, and eleazar, and malchijah, and benaiah.

10:26 and of the son of elam; mattaniah, zechariah, and jehiel, and
abdi, and jeremoth, and eliah.

10:27 and of the son of zattu; elioenai, eliashib, mattaniah, and
jeremoth, and zabad, and aziza.

10:28 Of the son also of bebai; jehohanan, hananiah, zabbai, and
athlai.

10:29 and of the son of bani; meshullam, malluch, and adaiah, jashub,
and sheal, and ramoth.

10:30 and of the son of pahathmoab; adna, and chelal, benaiah,
maaseiah, mattaniah, bezaleel, and binnui, and manasseh.

10:31 and of the son of harim; eliezer, ishijah, malchiah, shemaiah,
shimeon, 10:32 benjamin, malluch, and shemariah.

10:33 Of the son of hashum; mattenai, mattathah, zabad, eliphelet,
jeremai, manasseh, and shimei.

10:34 Of the son of bani; maadai, amram, and uel, 10:35 benaiah,
bedeiah, chelluh, 10:36 vaniah, meremoth, eliashib, 10:37 mattaniah,
mattenai, and jaasau, 10:38 and bani, and binnui, shimei, 10:39 and
shelemiah, and nathan, and adaiah, 10:40 machnadebai, shashai, sharai,
10:41 azareel, and shelemiah, shemariah, 10:42 shallum, amariah, and
joseph.

10:43 Of the son of nebo; jeiel, mattithiah, zabad, zebina, jadau,
and joel, benaiah.

10:44 all these had taken strang wives: and some of them had wive by
whom they had children.




th book of nehemiah


1:1 the word of nehemiah the son of hachaliah. and it came to pass
in the month chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I wa in shushan the
palace, 1:2 that hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men
of judah; and I ask them concern the jew that had escaped, which
wer left of the captivity, and concern jerusalem.

1:3 and they said unto me, the remnant that are left of the captivity
ther in the provinc are in great afflict and reproach: the wall
of jerusalem also is broken down, and the gate thereof are burned
with fire.

1:4 and it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and
wept, and mourn certain days, and fasted, and pray befor the god
of heaven, 1:5 and said, I beseech thee, O lord god of heaven, the
great and terribl god, that keepeth coven and merci for them that
lov him and observ hi commandments: 1:6 let thine ear now be
attentive, and thine eye open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of
thi servant, which I pray befor thee now, day and night, for the
children of israel thi servants, and confess the sin of the children
of israel, which we have sin against thee: both I and my father's
hous have sinned.

1:7 We have dealt veri corruptli against thee, and have not kept the
commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou
commandedst thi servant moses.

1:8 remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy
serv moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad
among the nations: 1:9 but if ye turn unto me, and keep my
commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the
uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I gather them from thence, and
wil bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name
there.

1:10 now these are thi servant and thi people, whom thou hast
redeem by thi great power, and by thi strong hand.

1:11 O lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attent to the
pray of thi servant, and to the prayer of thi servants, who desire
to fear thi name: and prosper, I pray thee, thi servant thi day, and
grant him merci in the sight of thi man. for I wa the king's
cupbearer.

2:1 and it came to pass in the month nisan, in the twentieth year of
artaxerx the king, that wine wa befor him: and I took up the wine,
and gave it unto the king. now I had not been beforetim sad in his
presence.

2:2 wherefor the king said unto me, whi is thi counten sad,
se thou art not sick? thi is noth els but sorrow of heart.
then I wa veri sore afraid, 2:3 and said unto the king, let the king
liv for ever: whi should not my counten be sad, when the city,
th place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates
thereof are consum with fire?  2:4 then the king said unto me, for
what dost thou make request? So I pray to the god of heaven.

2:5 and I said unto the king, If it pleas the king, and if thy
serv have found favour in thi sight, that thou wouldest send me
unto judah, unto the citi of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build
it.

2:6 and the king said unto me, (the queen also sit by him,) for
how long shall thi journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it
pleas the king to send me; and I set him a time.

2:7 moreov I said unto the king, If it pleas the king, let letters
b given me to the governor beyond the river, that they may convey me
ov till I come into judah; 2:8 and a letter unto asaph the keeper of
th king' forest, that he may give me timber to make beam for the
gat of the palac which appertain to the house, and for the wall
of the city, and for the hous that I shall enter into. and the king
grant me, accord to the good hand of my god upon me.

2:9 then I came to the governor beyond the river, and gave them the
king' letters. now the king had sent captain of the armi and
horsemen with me.

2:10 when sanballat the horonite, and tobiah the servant, the
ammonite, heard of it, it griev them exceedingli that there wa come
a man to seek the welfar of the children of israel.

2:11 So I came to jerusalem, and wa there three days.

2:12 and I aros in the night, I and some few men with me; neither
told I ani man what my god had put in my heart to do at jerusalem:
neith wa there ani beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon.

2:13 and I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before
th dragon well, and to the dung port, and view the wall of
jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gate thereof were consumed
with fire.

2:14 then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's
pool: but there wa no place for the beast that wa under me to pass.

2:15 then went I up in the night by the brook, and view the wall,
and turn back, and enter by the gate of the valley, and so
returned.

2:16 and the ruler knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither
had I as yet told it to the jews, nor to the priests, nor to the
nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.

2:17 then said I unto them, Ye see the distress that we are in, how
jerusalem lieth waste, and the gate thereof are burn with fire:
come, and let us build up the wall of jerusalem, that we be no more a
reproach.

2:18 then I told them of the hand of my god which wa good upon me; as
also the king' word that he had spoken unto me. and they said, let
u rise up and build. So they strengthen their hand for thi good
work.

2:19 but when sanballat the horonite, and tobiah the servant, the
ammonite, and geshem the arabian, heard it, they laugh us to scorn,
and despis us, and said, what is thi thing that ye do? will ye
rebel against the king?  2:20 then answer I them, and said unto
them, the god of heaven, he will prosper us; therefor we hi servants
wil aris and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial,
in jerusalem.

3:1 then eliashib the high priest rose up with hi brethren the
priests, and they build the sheep gate; they sanctifi it, and set
up the door of it; even unto the tower of meah they sanctifi it,
unto the tower of hananeel.

3:2 and next unto him build the men of jericho. and next to them
build zaccur the son of imri.

3:3 but the fish gate did the son of hassenaah build, who also laid
th beam thereof, and set up the door thereof, the lock thereof,
and the bar thereof.

3:4 and next unto them repair meremoth the son of urijah, the son of
koz. and next unto them repair meshullam the son of berechiah, the
son of meshezabeel. and next unto them repair zadok the son of
baana.

3:5 and next unto them the tekoit repaired; but their nobl put not
their neck to the work of their lord.

3:6 moreov the old gate repair jehoiada the son of paseah, and
meshullam the son of besodeiah; they laid the beam thereof, and set
up the door thereof, and the lock thereof, and the bar thereof.

3:7 and next unto them repair melatiah the gibeonite, and jadon the
meronothite, the men of gibeon, and of mizpah, unto the throne of the
governor on thi side the river.

3:8 next unto him repair uzziel the son of harhaiah, of the
goldsmiths.

next unto him also repair hananiah the son of one of the
apothecaries, and they fortifi jerusalem unto the broad wall.

3:9 and next unto them repair rephaiah the son of hur, the ruler of
th half part of jerusalem.

3:10 and next unto them repair jedaiah the son of harumaph, even
ov against hi house. and next unto him repair hattush the son of
hashabniah.

3:11 malchijah the son of harim, and hashub the son of pahathmoab,
repair the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces.

3:12 and next unto him repair shallum the son of halohesh, the ruler
of the half part of jerusalem, he and hi daughters.

3:13 the valley gate repair hanun, and the inhabit of zanoah;
they built it, and set up the door thereof, the lock thereof, and
th bar thereof, and a thousand cubit on the wall unto the dung
gate.

3:14 but the dung gate repair malchiah the son of rechab, the ruler
of part of bethhaccerem; he built it, and set up the door thereof,
th lock thereof, and the bar thereof.

3:15 but the gate of the fountain repair shallun the son of
colhozeh, the ruler of part of mizpah; he built it, and cover it,
and set up the door thereof, the lock thereof, and the bar thereof,
and the wall of the pool of siloah by the king' garden, and unto the
stair that go down from the citi of david.

3:16 after him repair nehemiah the son of azbuk, the ruler of the
half part of bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchr of
david, and to the pool that wa made, and unto the hous of the
mighty.

3:17 after him repair the levites, rehum the son of bani. next unto
him repair hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of keilah, in his
part.

3:18 after him repair their brethren, bavai the son of henadad, the
rul of the half part of keilah.

3:19 and next to him repair ezer the son of jeshua, the ruler of
mizpah, anoth piec over against the go up to the armouri at the
turn of the wall.

3:20 after him baruch the son of zabbai earnestli repair the other
piece, from the turn of the wall unto the door of the hous of
eliashib the high priest.

3:21 after him repair meremoth the son of urijah the son of koz
anoth piece, from the door of the hous of eliashib even to the end
of the hous of eliashib.

3:22 and after him repair the priests, the men of the plain.

3:23 after him repair benjamin and hashub over against their house.

aft him repair azariah the son of maaseiah the son of ananiah by
hi house.

3:24 after him repair binnui the son of henadad anoth piece, from
th hous of azariah unto the turn of the wall, even unto the
corner.

3:25 palal the son of uzai, over against the turn of the wall, and
th tower which lieth out from the king' high house, that wa by the
court of the prison. after him pedaiah the son of parosh.

3:26 moreov the nethinim dwelt in ophel, unto the place over
against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out.

3:27 after them the tekoit repair anoth piece, over against the
great tower that lieth out, even unto the wall of ophel.

3:28 from abov the hors gate repair the priests, everi one over
against hi house.

3:29 after them repair zadok the son of immer over against his
house.

aft him repair also shemaiah the son of shechaniah, the keeper of
th east gate.

3:30 after him repair hananiah the son of shelemiah, and hanun the
sixth son of zalaph, anoth piece. after him repair meshullam the
son of berechiah over against hi chamber.

3:31 after him repair malchiah the goldsmith' son unto the place of
th nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate miphkad,
and to the go up of the corner.

3:32 and between the go up of the corner unto the sheep gate
repair the goldsmith and the merchants.

4:1 but it came to pass, that when sanballat heard that we build the
wall, he wa wroth, and took great indignation, and mock the jews.

4:2 and he spake befor hi brethren and the armi of samaria, and
said, what do these feebl jews? will they fortifi themselves? will
they sacrifice?  will they make an end in a day? will they reviv the
ston out of the heap of the rubbish which are burned?  4:3 now
tobiah the ammonit wa by him, and he said, even that which they
build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.

4:4 hear, O our god; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon
their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity: 4:5
and cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blot out
from befor thee: for they have provok thee to anger befor the
builders.

4:6 So built we the wall; and all the wall wa join togeth unto
th half thereof: for the peopl had a mind to work.

4:7 but it came to pass, that when sanballat, and tobiah, and the
arabians, and the ammonites, and the ashdodites, heard that the walls
of jerusalem were made up, and that the breach began to be stopped,
then they were veri wroth, 4:8 and conspir all of them togeth to
com and to fight against jerusalem, and to hinder it.

4:9 nevertheless we made our prayer unto our god, and set a watch
against them day and night, becaus of them.

4:10 and judah said, the strength of the bearer of burden is
decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not abl to build
th wall.

4:11 and our adversari said, they shall not know, neither see, till
w come in the midst among them, and slay them, and caus the work to
cease.

4:12 and it came to pass, that when the jew which dwelt by them came,
they said unto us ten times, from all place whenc ye shall return
unto us they will be upon you.

4:13 therefor set I in the lower place behind the wall, and on the
high places, I even set the peopl after their famili with their
swords, their spears, and their bows.

4:14 and I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the
rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them:
rememb the lord, which is great and terrible, and fight for your
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.

4:15 and it came to pass, when our enemi heard that it wa known
unto us, and god had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned
al of us to the wall, everi one unto hi work.

4:16 and it came to pass from that time forth, that the half of my
serv wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the
spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers
wer behind all the hous of judah.

4:17 they which build on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with
thos that laded, everi one with one of hi hand wrought in the work,
and with the other hand held a weapon.

4:18 for the builders, everi one had hi sword gird by hi side, and
so builded. and he that sound the trumpet wa by me.

4:19 and I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of
th people, the work is great and large, and we are separ upon the
wall, one far from another.

4:20 In what place therefor ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort
y thither unto us: our god shall fight for us.

4:21 So we labour in the work: and half of them held the spear from
th rise of the morn till the star appeared.

4:22 likewis at the same time said I unto the people, let everi one
with hi servant lodg within jerusalem, that in the night they may be
a guard to us, and labour on the day.

4:23 So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of
th guard which follow me, none of us put off our clothes, saving
that everi one put them off for washing.

5:1 and there wa a great cri of the peopl and of their wive against
their brethren the jews.

5:2 for there were that said, we, our sons, and our daughters, are
many: therefor we take up corn for them, that we may eat, and live.

5:3 some also there were that said, We have mortgag our lands,
vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, becaus of the dearth.

5:4 there were also that said, We have borrow money for the king's
tribute, and that upon our land and vineyards.

5:5 yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as
their children: and, lo, we bring into bondag our son and our
daught to be servants, and some of our daughter are brought unto
bondag already: neither is it in our power to redeem them; for other
men have our land and vineyards.

5:6 and I wa veri angri when I heard their cri and these words.

5:7 then I consult with myself, and I rebuk the nobles, and the
rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, everi one of hi brother.
and I set a great assembl against them.

5:8 and I said unto them, We after our abil have redeem our
brethren the jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even
sel your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? then held they
their peace, and found noth to answer.

5:9 also I said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in
th fear of our god becaus of the reproach of the heathen our
enemies?  5:10 I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might
exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us leav off thi usury.

5:11 restore, I pray you, to them, even thi day, their lands, their
vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part
of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of
them.

5:12 then said they, We will restor them, and will requir noth of
them; so will we do as thou sayest. then I call the priests, and
took an oath of them, that they should do accord to thi promise.

5:13 also I shook my lap, and said, So god shake out everi man from
hi house, and from hi labour, that performeth not thi promise, even
thu be he shaken out, and emptied. and all the congreg said,
amen, and prais the lord. and the peopl did accord to this
promise.

5:14 moreov from the time that I wa appoint to be their governor
in the land of judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and
thirtieth year of artaxerx the king, that is, twelv years, I and my
brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor.

5:15 but the former governor that had been befor me were chargeable
unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, besid forty
shekel of silver; yea, even their servant bare rule over the people:
but so did not I, becaus of the fear of god.

5:16 yea, also I continu in the work of thi wall, neither bought we
ani land: and all my servant were gather thither unto the work.

5:17 moreov there were at my tabl an hundr and fifti of the jews
and rulers, besid those that came unto us from among the heathen that
ar about us.

5:18 now that which wa prepar for me daili wa one ox and six
choic sheep; also fowl were prepar for me, and onc in ten days
stor of all sort of wine: yet for all thi requir not I the bread
of the governor, becaus the bondag wa heavi upon thi people.

5:19 think upon me, my god, for good, accord to all that I have
don for thi people.

6:1 now it came to pass when sanballat, and tobiah, and geshem the
arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had build the
wall, and that there wa no breach left therein; (though at that time
i had not set up the door upon the gates;) 6:2 that sanballat and
geshem sent unto me, saying, come, let us meet togeth in some one of
th villag in the plain of ono. but they thought to do me mischief.

6:3 and I sent messeng unto them, saying, I am do a great work,
so that I cannot come down: whi should the work cease, whilst I leave
it, and come down to you?  6:4 yet they sent unto me four time after
thi sort; and I answer them after the same manner.

6:5 then sent sanballat hi servant unto me in like manner the fifth
tim with an open letter in hi hand; 6:6 wherein wa written, It is
report among the heathen, and gashmu saith it, that thou and the
jew think to rebel: for which caus thou buildest the wall, that thou
mayest be their king, accord to these words.

6:7 and thou hast also appoint prophet to preach of thee at
jerusalem, saying, there is a king in judah: and now shall it be
report to the king accord to these words. come now therefore, and
let us take counsel together.

6:8 then I sent unto him, saying, there are no such thing done as
thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.

6:9 for they all made us afraid, saying, their hand shall be weakened
from the work, that it be not done. now therefore, O god, strengthen
mi hands.

6:10 afterward I came unto the hous of shemaiah the son of delaiah
th son of mehetabeel, who wa shut up; and he said, let us meet
togeth in the hous of god, within the temple, and let us shut the
door of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the
night will they come to slay thee.

6:11 and I said, should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that,
b as I am, would go into the templ to save hi life? I will not
go in.

6:12 and, lo, I perceiv that god had not sent him; but that he
pronounc thi propheci against me: for tobiah and sanballat had
hir him.

6:13 therefor wa he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and
sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they
might reproach me.

6:14 My god, think thou upon tobiah and sanballat accord to these
their works, and on the prophetess noadiah, and the rest of the
prophets, that would have put me in fear.

6:15 So the wall wa finish in the twenti and fifth day of the month
elul, in fifti and two days.

6:16 and it came to pass, that when all our enemi heard thereof, and
al the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much
cast down in their own eyes: for they perceiv that thi work was
wrought of our god.

6:17 moreov in those day the nobl of judah sent mani letter unto
tobiah, and the letter of tobiah came unto them.

6:18 for there were mani in judah sworn unto him, becaus he wa the
son in law of shechaniah the son of arah; and hi son johanan had
taken the daughter of meshullam the son of berechiah.

6:19 also they report hi good deed befor me, and utter my words
to him. and tobiah sent letter to put me in fear.

7:1 now it came to pass, when the wall wa built, and I had set up the
doors, and the porter and the singer and the levit were appointed,
7:2 that I gave my brother hanani, and hananiah the ruler of the
palace, charg over jerusalem: for he wa a faith man, and feared
god abov many.

7:3 and I said unto them, let not the gate of jerusalem be opened
until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the
doors, and bar them: and appoint watch of the inhabit of
jerusalem, everi one in hi watch, and everi one to be over against
hi house.

7:4 now the citi wa larg and great: but the peopl were few therein,
and the hous were not builded.

7:5 and my god put into mine heart to gather togeth the nobles, and
th rulers, and the people, that they might be reckon by genealogy.
and I found a regist of the genealog of them which came up at the
first, and found written therein, 7:6 these are the children of the
province, that went up out of the captivity, of those that had been
carri away, whom nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon had carried
away, and came again to jerusalem and to judah, everi one unto his
city; 7:7 who came with zerubbabel, jeshua, nehemiah, azariah,
raamiah, nahamani, mordecai, bilshan, mispereth, bigvai, nehum,
baanah. the number, I say, of the men of the peopl of israel was
this; 7:8 the children of parosh, two thousand an hundr seventi and
two.

7:9 the children of shephatiah, three hundr seventi and two.

7:10 the children of arah, six hundr fifti and two.

7:11 the children of pahathmoab, of the children of jeshua and joab,
two thousand and eight hundr and eighteen.

7:12 the children of elam, a thousand two hundr fifti and four.

7:13 the children of zattu, eight hundr forti and five.

7:14 the children of zaccai, seven hundr and threescore.

7:15 the children of binnui, six hundr forti and eight.

7:16 the children of bebai, six hundr twenti and eight.

7:17 the children of azgad, two thousand three hundr twenti and two.

7:18 the children of adonikam, six hundr threescor and seven.

7:19 the children of bigvai, two thousand threescor and seven.

7:20 the children of adin, six hundr fifti and five.

7:21 the children of ater of hezekiah, nineti and eight.

7:22 the children of hashum, three hundr twenti and eight.

7:23 the children of bezai, three hundr twenti and four.

7:24 the children of hariph, an hundr and twelve.

7:25 the children of gibeon, nineti and five.

7:26 the men of bethlehem and netophah, an hundr fourscor and
eight.

7:27 the men of anathoth, an hundr twenti and eight.

7:28 the men of bethazmaveth, forti and two.

7:29 the men of kirjathjearim, chephirah, and beeroth, seven hundred
forti and three.

7:30 the men of ramah and gaba, six hundr twenti and one.

7:31 the men of michmas, an hundr and twenti and two.

7:32 the men of bethel and ai, an hundr twenti and three.

7:33 the men of the other nebo, fifti and two.

7:34 the children of the other elam, a thousand two hundr fifti and
four.

7:35 the children of harim, three hundr and twenty.

7:36 the children of jericho, three hundr forti and five.

7:37 the children of lod, hadid, and ono, seven hundr twenti and
one.

7:38 the children of senaah, three thousand nine hundr and thirty.

7:39 the priests: the children of jedaiah, of the hous of jeshua,
nin hundr seventi and three.

7:40 the children of immer, a thousand fifti and two.

7:41 the children of pashur, a thousand two hundr forti and seven.

7:42 the children of harim, a thousand and seventeen.

7:43 the levites: the children of jeshua, of kadmiel, and of the
children of hodevah, seventi and four.

7:44 the singers: the children of asaph, an hundr forti and eight.

7:45 the porters: the children of shallum, the children of ater, the
children of talmon, the children of akkub, the children of hatita, the
children of shobai, an hundr thirti and eight.

7:46 the nethinims: the children of ziha, the children of hashupha,
th children of tabbaoth, 7:47 the children of keros, the children of
sia, the children of padon, 7:48 the children of lebana, the children
of hagaba, the children of shalmai, 7:49 the children of hanan, the
children of giddel, the children of gahar, 7:50 the children of
reaiah, the children of rezin, the children of nekoda, 7:51 the
children of gazzam, the children of uzza, the children of phaseah,
7:52 the children of besai, the children of meunim, the children of
nephishesim, 7:53 the children of bakbuk, the children of hakupha, the
children of harhur, 7:54 the children of bazlith, the children of
mehida, the children of harsha, 7:55 the children of barkos, the
children of sisera, the children of tamah, 7:56 the children of
neziah, the children of hatipha.

7:57 the children of solomon' servants: the children of sotai, the
children of sophereth, the children of perida, 7:58 the children of
jaala, the children of darkon, the children of giddel, 7:59 the
children of shephatiah, the children of hattil, the children of
pochereth of zebaim, the children of amon.

7:60 all the nethinims, and the children of solomon' servants, were
thre hundr nineti and two.

7:61 and these were they which went up also from telmelah, telharesha,
cherub, addon, and immer: but they could not shew their father's
house, nor their seed, whether they were of israel.

7:62 the children of delaiah, the children of tobiah, the children of
nekoda, six hundr forti and two.

7:63 and of the priests: the children of habaiah, the children of koz,
th children of barzillai, which took one of the daughter of
barzillai the gileadit to wife, and wa call after their name.

7:64 these sought their regist among those that were reckon by
genealogy, but it wa not found: therefor were they, as polluted, put
from the priesthood.

7:65 and the tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the
most holi things, till there stood up a priest with urim and thummim.

7:66 the whole congreg togeth wa forti and two thousand three
hundr and threescore, 7:67 besid their manserv and their
maidservants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundr thirty
and seven: and they had two hundr forti and five sing men and
sing women.

7:68 their horses, seven hundr thirti and six: their mules, two
hundr forti and five: 7:69 their camels, four hundr thirti and
five: six thousand seven hundr and twenti asses.

7:70 and some of the chief of the father gave unto the work. the
tirshatha gave to the treasur a thousand dram of gold, fifti basons,
f hundr and thirti priests' garments.

7:71 and some of the chief of the father gave to the treasur of the
work twenti thousand dram of gold, and two thousand and two hundred
pound of silver.

7:72 and that which the rest of the peopl gave wa twenti thousand
dram of gold, and two thousand pound of silver, and threescor and
seven priests' garments.

7:73 So the priests, and the levites, and the porters, and the
singers, and some of the people, and the nethinims, and all israel,
dwelt in their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children
of israel were in their cities.

8:1 and all the peopl gather themselv togeth as one man into
th street that wa befor the water gate; and they spake unto ezra
th scribe to bring the book of the law of moses, which the lord had
command to israel.

8:2 and ezra the priest brought the law befor the congreg both
of men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the
first day of the seventh month.

8:3 and he read therein befor the street that wa befor the water
g from the morn until midday, befor the men and the women, and
thos that could understand; and the ear of all the peopl were
attent unto the book of the law.

8:4 and ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had
mad for the purpose; and besid him stood mattithiah, and shema, and
anaiah, and urijah, and hilkiah, and maaseiah, on hi right hand; and
on hi left hand, pedaiah, and mishael, and malchiah, and hashum, and
hashbadana, zechariah, and meshullam.

8:5 and ezra open the book in the sight of all the people; (for he
wa abov all the people;) and when he open it, all the peopl stood
up: 8:6 and ezra bless the lord, the great god. and all the people
answered, amen, amen, with lift up their hands: and they bowed
their heads, and worship the lord with their face to the ground.

8:7 also jeshua, and bani, and sherebiah, jamin, akkub, shabbethai,
hodijah, maaseiah, kelita, azariah, jozabad, hanan, pelaiah, and the
levites, caus the peopl to understand the law: and the peopl stood
in their place.

8:8 So they read in the book in the law of god distinctly, and gave
th sense, and caus them to understand the reading.

8:9 and nehemiah, which is the tirshatha, and ezra the priest the
scribe, and the levit that taught the people, said unto all the
people, thi day is holi unto the lord your god; mourn not, nor weep.
for all the peopl wept, when they heard the word of the law.

8:10 then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, and send portion unto them for whom noth is prepared: for
thi day is holi unto our lord: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of
th lord is your strength.

8:11 So the levit still all the people, saying, hold your peace,
for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.

8:12 and all the peopl went their way to eat, and to drink, and to
send portions, and to make great mirth, becaus they had understood
th word that were declar unto them.

8:13 and on the second day were gather togeth the chief of the
fath of all the people, the priests, and the levites, unto ezra the
scribe, even to understand the word of the law.

8:14 and they found written in the law which the lord had command by
moses, that the children of israel should dwell in booth in the feast
of the seventh month: 8:15 and that they should publish and proclaim
in all their cities, and in jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the
mount, and fetch oliv branches, and pine branches, and myrtle
branches, and palm branches, and branch of thick trees, to make
booths, as it is written.

8:16 So the peopl went forth, and brought them, and made themselves
booths, everi one upon the roof of hi house, and in their courts, and
in the court of the hous of god, and in the street of the water
gate, and in the street of the gate of ephraim.

8:17 and all the congreg of them that were come again out of the
capt made booths, and sat under the booths: for sinc the day of
jeshua the son of nun unto that day had not the children of israel
don so. and there wa veri great gladness.

8:18 also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in
th book of the law of god. and they kept the feast seven days; and on
th eighth day wa a solemn assembly, accord unto the manner.

9:1 now in the twenti and fourth day of thi month the children of
israel were assembl with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth
upon them.

9:2 and the seed of israel separ themselv from all strangers,
and stood and confess their sins, and the iniqu of their
fathers.

9:3 and they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law
of the lord their god one fourth part of the day; and anoth fourth
part they confessed, and worship the lord their god.

9:4 then stood up upon the stairs, of the levites, jeshua, and bani,
kadmiel, shebaniah, bunni, sherebiah, bani, and chenani, and cried
with a loud voic unto the lord their god.

9:5 then the levites, jeshua, and kadmiel, bani, hashabniah,
sherebiah, hodijah, shebaniah, and pethahiah, said, stand up and bless
th lord your god for ever and ever: and bless be thi gloriou name,
which is exalt abov all bless and praise.

9:6 thou, even thou, art lord alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven
of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all thing that are
therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them
all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.

9:7 thou art the lord the god, who didst choos abram, and broughtest
him forth out of Ur of the chaldees, and gavest him the name of
abraham; 9:8 and foundest hi heart faith befor thee, and madest a
coven with him to give the land of the canaanites, the hittites,
th amorites, and the perizzites, and the jebusites, and the
girgashites, to give it, I say, to hi seed, and hast perform thy
words; for thou art righteous: 9:9 and didst see the afflict of our
fath in egypt, and heardest their cri by the red sea; 9:10 and
shewedst sign and wonder upon pharaoh, and on all hi servants, and
on all the peopl of hi land: for thou knewest that they dealt
proudli against them. So didst thou get thee a name, as it is this
day.

9:11 and thou didst divid the sea befor them, so that they went
through the midst of the sea on the dri land; and their persecutors
th threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighti waters.

9:12 moreov thou leddest them in the day by a cloudi pillar; and in
th night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein
they should go.

9:13 thou camest down also upon mount sinai, and spakest with them
from heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, good
statut and commandments: 9:14 and madest known unto them thi holy
sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the
hand of mose thi servant: 9:15 and gavest them bread from heaven for
their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for
their thirst, and promisedst them that they should go in to possess
th land which thou hadst sworn to give them.

9:16 but they and our father dealt proudly, and harden their necks,
and hearken not to thi commandments, 9:17 and refus to obey,
neith were mind of thi wonder that thou didst among them; but
harden their necks, and in their rebellion appoint a captain to
return to their bondage: but thou art a god readi to pardon, gracious
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsookest
them not.

9:18 yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, thi is thy
god that brought thee up out of egypt, and had wrought great
provocations; 9:19 yet thou in thi manifold merci forsookest them
not in the wilderness: the pillar of the cloud depart not from them
bi day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night,
to shew them light, and the way wherein they should go.

9:20 thou gavest also thi good spirit to instruct them, and
withheldest not thi manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for
their thirst.

9:21 yea, forti year didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, so
that they lack nothing; their cloth wax not old, and their feet
swel not.

9:22 moreov thou gavest them kingdom and nations, and didst divide
them into corners: so they possess the land of sihon, and the land
of the king of heshbon, and the land of Og king of bashan.

9:23 their children also multipliedst thou as the star of heaven, and
broughtest them into the land, concern which thou hadst promis to
their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.

9:24 So the children went in and possess the land, and thou
subduedst befor them the inhabit of the land, the canaanites, and
gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the peopl of the
land, that they might do with them as they would.

9:25 and they took strong cities, and a fat land, and possess houses
ful of all goods, well digged, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit
tre in abundance: so they did eat, and were filled, and becam fat,
and delight themselv in thi great goodness.

9:26 nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebel against thee,
and cast thi law behind their backs, and slew thi prophet which
testifi against them to turn them to thee, and they wrought great
provocations.

9:27 therefor thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies,
who vex them: and in the time of their trouble, when they cri unto
thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and accord to thi manifold
merci thou gavest them saviours, who save them out of the hand of
their enemies.

9:28 but after they had rest, they did evil again befor thee:
therefor leftest thou them in the land of their enemies, so that they
had the dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cri unto
thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and mani time didst thou
deliv them accord to thi mercies; 9:29 and testifiedst against
them, that thou mightest bring them again unto thi law: yet they dealt
proudly, and hearken not unto thi commandments, but sin against
thi judgments, (which if a man do, he shall live in them;) and
withdrew the shoulder, and harden their neck, and would not hear.

9:30 yet mani year didst thou forbear them, and testifiedst against
them by thi spirit in thi prophets: yet would they not give ear:
therefor gavest thou them into the hand of the peopl of the lands.

9:31 nevertheless for thi great mercies' sake thou didst not utterly
consum them, nor forsak them; for thou art a graciou and merciful
god.

9:32 now therefore, our god, the great, the mighty, and the terrible
god, who keepest coven and mercy, let not all the troubl seem
littl befor thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our
princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers,
and on all thi people, sinc the time of the king of assyria unto
thi day.

9:33 howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou
hast done right, but we have done wickedly: 9:34 neither have our
kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thi law, nor
hearken unto thi command and thi testimonies, wherewith thou
didst testifi against them.

9:35 for they have not serv thee in their kingdom, and in thi great
good that thou gavest them, and in the larg and fat land which
thou gavest befor them, neither turn they from their wick works.

9:36 behold, we are servant thi day, and for the land that thou
gavest unto our father to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof,
behold, we are servant in it: 9:37 and it yieldeth much increas unto
th king whom thou hast set over us becaus of our sins: also they
hav dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure,
and we are in great distress.

9:38 and becaus of all thi we make a sure covenant, and write it;
and our princes, levites, and priests, seal unto it.

10:1 now those that seal were, nehemiah, the tirshatha, the son of
hachaliah, and zidkijah, 10:2 seraiah, azariah, jeremiah, 10:3 pashur,
amariah, malchijah, 10:4 hattush, shebaniah, malluch, 10:5 harim,
meremoth, obadiah, 10:6 daniel, ginnethon, baruch, 10:7 meshullam,
abijah, mijamin, 10:8 maaziah, bilgai, shemaiah: these were the
priests.

10:9 and the levites: both jeshua the son of azaniah, binnui of the
son of henadad, kadmiel; 10:10 and their brethren, shebaniah,
hodijah, kelita, pelaiah, hanan, 10:11 micha, rehob, hashabiah, 10:12
zaccur, sherebiah, shebaniah, 10:13 hodijah, bani, beninu.

10:14 the chief of the people; parosh, pahathmoab, elam, zatthu, bani,
10:15 bunni, azgad, bebai, 10:16 adonijah, bigvai, adin, 10:17 ater,
hizkijah, azzur, 10:18 hodijah, hashum, bezai, 10:19 hariph, anathoth,
nebai, 10:20 magpiash, meshullam, hezir, 10:21 meshezabeel, zadok,
jaddua, 10:22 pelatiah, hanan, anaiah, 10:23 hoshea, hananiah, hashub,
10:24 hallohesh, pileha, shobek, 10:25 rehum, hashabnah, maaseiah,
10:26 and ahijah, hanan, anan, 10:27 malluch, harim, baanah.

10:28 and the rest of the people, the priests, the levites, the
porters, the singers, the nethinims, and all they that had separated
themselv from the peopl of the land unto the law of god, their
wives, their sons, and their daughters, everi one have knowledge,
and have understanding; 10:29 they clave to their brethren, their
nobles, and enter into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in god's
law, which wa given by mose the servant of god, and to observ and
do all the command of the lord our lord, and hi judgment and
hi statutes; 10:30 and that we would not give our daughter unto the
peopl of the land, not take their daughter for our sons: 10:31 and
if the peopl of the land bring ware or ani victual on the sabbath
day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on
th holi day: and that we would leav the seventh year, and the
exact of everi debt.

10:32 also we made ordin for us, to charg ourselv yearli with
th third part of a shekel for the servic of the hous of our god;
10:33 for the shewbread, and for the continu meat offering, and for
th continu burnt offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for
th set feasts, and for the holi things, and for the sin offer to
mak an aton for israel, and for all the work of the hous of our
god.

10:34 and we cast the lot among the priests, the levites, and the
people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the hous of our god,
aft the hous of our fathers, at time appoint year by year, to
burn upon the altar of the lord our god, as it is written in the law:
10:35 and to bring the firstfruit of our ground, and the firstfruits
of all fruit of all trees, year by year, unto the hous of the lord:
10:36 also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is
written in the law, and the firstl of our herd and of our flocks,
to bring to the hous of our god, unto the priest that minist in
th hous of our god: 10:37 and that we should bring the firstfruits
of our dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees,
of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chamber of the hous of
our god; and the tith of our ground unto the levites, that the same
levit might have the tith in all the citi of our tillage.

10:38 and the priest the son of aaron shall be with the levites, when
th levit take tithes: and the levit shall bring up the tith of
th tith unto the hous of our god, to the chambers, into the
treasur house.

10:39 for the children of israel and the children of levi shall bring
th offer of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the
chambers, where are the vessel of the sanctuary, and the priest that
minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake
th hous of our god.

11:1 and the ruler of the peopl dwelt at jerusalem: the rest of the
peopl also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in jerusalem the
holi city, and nine part to dwell in other cities.

11:2 and the peopl bless all the men, that willingli offered
themselv to dwell at jerusalem.

11:3 now these are the chief of the provinc that dwelt in jerusalem:
but in the citi of judah dwelt everi one in hi possess in their
cities, to wit, israel, the priests, and the levites, and the
nethinims, and the children of solomon' servants.

11:4 and at jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of judah, and of
th children of benjamin. Of the children of judah; athaiah the son of
uzziah, the son of zechariah, the son of amariah, the son of
shephatiah, the son of mahalaleel, of the children of perez; 11:5 and
maaseiah the son of baruch, the son of colhozeh, the son of hazaiah,
th son of adaiah, the son of joiarib, the son of zechariah, the son
of shiloni.

11:6 all the son of perez that dwelt at jerusalem were four hundred
threescor and eight valiant men.

11:7 and these are the son of benjamin; sallu the son of meshullam,
th son of joed, the son of pedaiah, the son of kolaiah, the son of
maaseiah, the son of ithiel, the son of jesaiah.

11:8 and after him gabbai, sallai, nine hundr twenti and eight.

11:9 and joel the son of zichri wa their overseer: and judah the son
of senuah wa second over the city.

11:10 Of the priests: jedaiah the son of joiarib, jachin.

11:11 seraiah the son of hilkiah, the son of meshullam, the son of
zadok, the son of meraioth, the son of ahitub, wa the ruler of the
hous of god.

11:12 and their brethren that did the work of the hous were eight
hundr twenti and two: and adaiah the son of jeroham, the son of
pelaliah, the son of amzi, the son of zechariah, the son of pashur,
th son of malchiah.

11:13 and hi brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundr forti and
two: and amashai the son of azareel, the son of ahasai, the son of
meshillemoth, the son of immer, 11:14 and their brethren, mighti men
of valour, an hundr twenti and eight: and their overs was
zabdiel, the son of one of the great men.

11:15 also of the levites: shemaiah the son of hashub, the son of
azrikam, the son of hashabiah, the son of bunni; 11:16 and shabbethai
and jozabad, of the chief of the levites, had the oversight of the
outward busi of the hous of god.

11:17 and mattaniah the son of micha, the son of zabdi, the son of
asaph, wa the princip to begin the thanksgiv in prayer: and
bakbukiah the second among hi brethren, and abda the son of shammua,
th son of galal, the son of jeduthun.

11:18 all the levit in the holi citi were two hundr fourscor and
four.

11:19 moreov the porters, akkub, talmon, and their brethren that
kept the gates, were an hundr seventi and two.

11:20 and the residu of israel, of the priests, and the levites, were
in all the citi of judah, everi one in hi inheritance.

11:21 but the nethinim dwelt in ophel: and ziha and gispa were over
th nethinims.

11:22 the overs also of the levit at jerusalem wa uzzi the son
of bani, the son of hashabiah, the son of mattaniah, the son of micha.
of the son of asaph, the singer were over the busi of the house
of god.

11:23 for it wa the king' command concern them, that a
certain portion should be for the singers, due for everi day.

11:24 and pethahiah the son of meshezabeel, of the children of zerah
th son of judah, wa at the king' hand in all matter concern the
people.

11:25 and for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of
judah dwelt at kirjatharba, and in the villag thereof, and at dibon,
and in the villag thereof, and at jekabzeel, and in the villages
thereof, 11:26 and at jeshua, and at moladah, and at bethphelet, 11:27
and at hazarshual, and at beersheba, and in the villag thereof,
11:28 and at ziklag, and at mekonah, and in the villag thereof,
11:29 and at enrimmon, and at zareah, and at jarmuth, 11:30 zanoah,
adullam, and in their villages, at lachish, and the field thereof, at
azekah, and in the villag thereof. and they dwelt from beersheba
unto the valley of hinnom.

11:31 the children also of benjamin from geba dwelt at michmash, and
aija, and bethel, and in their villages.

11:32 and at anathoth, nob, ananiah, 11:33 hazor, ramah, gittaim,
11:34 hadid, zeboim, neballat, 11:35 lod, and ono, the valley of
craftsmen.

11:36 and of the levit were divis in judah, and in benjamin.

12:1 now these are the priest and the levit that went up with
zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and jeshua: seraiah, jeremiah, ezra,
12:2 amariah, malluch, hattush, 12:3 shechaniah, rehum, meremoth, 12:4
iddo, ginnetho, abijah, 12:5 miamin, maadiah, bilgah, 12:6 shemaiah,
and joiarib, jedaiah, 12:7 sallu, amok, hilkiah, jedaiah. these were
th chief of the priest and of their brethren in the day of jeshua.

12:8 moreov the levites: jeshua, binnui, kadmiel, sherebiah, judah,
and mattaniah, which wa over the thanksgiving, he and hi brethren.

12:9 also bakbukiah and unni, their brethren, were over against them
in the watches.

12:10 and jeshua begat joiakim, joiakim also begat eliashib, and
eliashib begat joiada, 12:11 and joiada begat jonathan, and jonathan
begat jaddua.

12:12 and in the day of joiakim were priests, the chief of the
fathers: of seraiah, meraiah; of jeremiah, hananiah; 12:13 Of ezra,
meshullam; of amariah, jehohanan; 12:14 Of melicu, jonathan; of
shebaniah, joseph; 12:15 Of harim, adna; of meraioth, helkai; 12:16 of
iddo, zechariah; of ginnethon, meshullam; 12:17 Of abijah, zichri; of
miniamin, of moadiah, piltai: 12:18 Of bilgah, shammua; of shemaiah,
jehonathan; 12:19 and of joiarib, mattenai; of jedaiah, uzzi; 12:20 of
sallai, kallai; of amok, eber; 12:21 Of hilkiah, hashabiah; of
jedaiah, nethaneel.

12:22 the levit in the day of eliashib, joiada, and johanan, and
jaddua, were record chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the
reign of dariu the persian.

12:23 the son of levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the
book of the chronicles, even until the day of johanan the son of
eliashib.

12:24 and the chief of the levites: hashabiah, sherebiah, and jeshua
th son of kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise
and to give thanks, accord to the command of david the man of
god, ward over against ward.

12:25 mattaniah, and bakbukiah, obadiah, meshullam, talmon, akkub,
wer porter keep the ward at the threshold of the gates.

12:26 these were in the day of joiakim the son of jeshua, the son of
jozadak, and in the day of nehemiah the governor, and of ezra the
priest, the scribe.

12:27 and at the dedic of the wall of jerusalem they sought the
levit out of all their places, to bring them to jerusalem, to keep
th dedic with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with
singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps.

12:28 and the son of the singer gather themselv together, both
out of the plain countri round about jerusalem, and from the villages
of netophathi; 12:29 also from the hous of gilgal, and out of the
field of geba and azmaveth: for the singer had build them villages
round about jerusalem.

12:30 and the priest and the levit purifi themselves, and
purifi the people, and the gates, and the wall.

12:31 then I brought up the princ of judah upon the wall, and
appoint two great compani of them that gave thanks, whereof one
w on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate: 12:32 and
aft them went hoshaiah, and half of the princ of judah, 12:33 and
azariah, ezra, and meshullam, 12:34 judah, and benjamin, and shemaiah,
and jeremiah, 12:35 and certain of the priests' son with trumpets;
namely, zechariah the son of jonathan, the son of shemaiah, the son of
mattaniah, the son of michaiah, the son of zaccur, the son of asaph:
12:36 and hi brethren, shemaiah, and azarael, milalai, gilalai, maai,
nethaneel, and judah, hanani, with the music instrument of david
th man of god, and ezra the scribe befor them.

12:37 and at the fountain gate, which wa over against them, they went
up by the stair of the citi of david, at the go up of the wall,
abov the hous of david, even unto the water gate eastward.

12:38 and the other compani of them that gave thank went over against
them, and I after them, and the half of the peopl upon the wall, from
beyond the tower of the furnac even unto the broad wall; 12:39 and
from abov the gate of ephraim, and abov the old gate, and abov the
fish gate, and the tower of hananeel, and the tower of meah, even unto
th sheep gate: and they stood still in the prison gate.

12:40 So stood the two compani of them that gave thank in the house
of god, and I, and the half of the ruler with me: 12:41 and the
priests; eliakim, maaseiah, miniamin, michaiah, elioenai, zechariah,
and hananiah, with trumpets; 12:42 and maaseiah, and shemaiah, and
eleazar, and uzzi, and jehohanan, and malchijah, and elam, and ezer.
and the singer sang loud, with jezrahiah their overseer.

12:43 also that day they offer great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for
god had made them rejoic with great joy: the wive also and the
children rejoiced: so that the joy of jerusalem wa heard even afar
off.

12:44 and at that time were some appoint over the chamber for the
treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes,
to gather into them out of the field of the citi the portion of
th law for the priest and levites: for judah rejoic for the
priest and for the levit that waited.

12:45 and both the singer and the porter kept the ward of their god,
and the ward of the purification, accord to the command of
david, and of solomon hi son.

12:46 for in the day of david and asaph of old there were chief of
th singers, and song of prais and thanksgiv unto god.

12:47 and all israel in the day of zerubbabel, and in the day of
nehemiah, gave the portion of the singer and the porters, everi day
hi portion: and they sanctifi holi thing unto the levites; and the
levit sanctifi them unto the children of aaron.

13:1 On that day they read in the book of mose in the audienc of the
people; and therein wa found written, that the ammonit and the
moabit should not come into the congreg of god for ever; 13:2
becaus they met not the children of israel with bread and with water,
but hire balaam against them, that he should curs them: howbeit our
god turn the curs into a blessing.

13:3 now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they
separ from israel all the mix multitude.

13:4 and befor this, eliashib the priest, have the oversight of the
chamb of the hous of our god, wa alli unto tobiah: 13:5 and he
had prepar for him a great chamber, where aforetim they laid the
meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tith of
th corn, the new wine, and the oil, which wa command to be given
to the levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the offer of
th priests.

13:6 but in all thi time wa not I at jerusalem: for in the two and
thirtieth year of artaxerx king of babylon came I unto the king, and
aft certain day obtain I leav of the king: 13:7 and I came to
jerusalem, and understood of the evil that eliashib did for tobiah, in
prepar him a chamber in the court of the hous of god.

13:8 and it griev me sore: therefor I cast forth all the household
stuff to tobiah out of the chamber.

13:9 then I commanded, and they cleans the chambers: and thither
brought I again the vessel of the hous of god, with the meat
off and the frankincense.

13:10 and I perceiv that the portion of the levit had not been
given them: for the levit and the singers, that did the work, were
fl everi one to hi field.

13:11 then contend I with the rulers, and said, whi is the hous of
god forsaken? and I gather them together, and set them in their
place.

13:12 then brought all judah the tith of the corn and the new wine
and the oil unto the treasuries.

13:13 and I made treasur over the treasuries, shelemiah the priest,
and zadok the scribe, and of the levites, pedaiah: and next to them
wa hanan the son of zaccur, the son of mattaniah: for they were
count faithful, and their offic wa to distribut unto their
brethren.

13:14 rememb me, O my god, concern this, and wipe not out my good
de that I have done for the hous of my god, and for the offices
thereof.

13:15 In those day saw I in judah some tread wine press on the
sabbath, and bring in sheaves, and lade asses; as also wine,
grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into
jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testifi against them in the day
wherein they sold victuals.

13:16 there dwelt men of tyre also therein, which brought fish, and
al manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of
judah, and in jerusalem.

13:17 then I contend with the nobl of judah, and said unto them,
what evil thing is thi that ye do, and profan the sabbath day?
13:18 did not your father thus, and did not our god bring all this
evil upon us, and upon thi city? yet ye bring more wrath upon israel
bi profan the sabbath.

13:19 and it came to pass, that when the gate of jerusalem began to
b dark befor the sabbath, I command that the gate should be shut,
and charg that they should not be open till after the sabbath: and
som of my servant set I at the gates, that there should no burden be
brought in on the sabbath day.

13:20 So the merchant and seller of all kind of ware lodg without
jerusalem onc or twice.

13:21 then I testifi against them, and said unto them, whi lodg ye
about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hand on you. from that
tim forth came they no more on the sabbath.

13:22 and I command the levit that they should cleans themselves,
and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctifi the sabbath
day.

rememb me, O my god, concern thi also, and spare me accord to
th great of thi mercy.

13:23 In those day also saw I jew that had marri wive of ashdod,
of ammon, and of moab: 13:24 and their children spake half in the
speech of ashdod, and could not speak in the jews' language, but
accord to the languag of each people.

13:25 and I contend with them, and curs them, and smote certain of
them, and pluck off their hair, and made them swear by god, saying,
y shall not give your daughter unto their sons, nor take their
daught unto your sons, or for yourselves.

13:26 did not solomon king of israel sin by these things? yet among
mani nation wa there no king like him, who wa belov of hi god,
and god made him king over all israel: nevertheless even him did
outlandish women caus to sin.

13:27 shall we then hearken unto you to do all thi great evil, to
transgress against our god in marri strang wives?  13:28 and one
of the son of joiada, the son of eliashib the high priest, wa son in
law to sanballat the horonite: therefor I chase him from me.

13:29 rememb them, O my god, becaus they have defil the
priesthood, and the coven of the priesthood, and of the levites.

13:30 thu cleans I them from all strangers, and appoint the wards
of the priest and the levites, everi one in hi business; 13:31 and
for the wood offering, at time appointed, and for the firstfruits.
rememb me, O my god, for good.




th book of esther


1:1 now it came to pass in the day of ahasuerus, (thi is ahasuerus
which reigned, from india even unto ethiopia, over an hundr and
seven and twenti provinces:) 1:2 that in those days, when the king
ahasueru sat on the throne of hi kingdom, which wa in shushan the
palace, 1:3 In the third year of hi reign, he made a feast unto all
hi princ and hi servants; the power of persia and media, the
nobl and princ of the provinces, be befor him: 1:4 when he
shew the rich of hi gloriou kingdom and the honour of his
excel majesti mani days, even an hundr and fourscor days.

1:5 and when these day were expired, the king made a feast unto all
th peopl that were present in shushan the palace, both unto great
and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's
palace; 1:6 where were white, green, and blue, hangings, fasten with
cord of fine linen and purpl to silver ring and pillar of marble:
th bed were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue,
and white, and black, marble.

1:7 and they gave them drink in vessel of gold, (the vessel being
divers one from another,) and royal wine in abundance, accord to
th state of the king.

1:8 and the drink wa accord to the law; none did compel: for so
th king had appoint to all the offic of hi house, that they
should do accord to everi man' pleasure.

1:9 also vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal
hous which belong to king ahasuerus.

1:10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king wa merri with
wine, he command mehuman, biztha, harbona, bigtha, and abagtha,
zethar, and carcas, the seven chamberlain that serv in the presence
of ahasueru the king, 1:11 To bring vashti the queen befor the king
with the crown royal, to shew the peopl and the princ her beauty:
for she wa fair to look on.

1:12 but the queen vashti refus to come at the king' command by
hi chamberlains: therefor wa the king veri wroth, and hi anger
burn in him.

1:13 then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so
wa the king' manner toward all that knew law and judgment: 1:14 and
th next unto him wa carshena, shethar, admatha, tarshish, meres,
marsena, and memucan, the seven princ of persia and media, which saw
th king' face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;) 1:15 what
shal we do unto the queen vashti accord to law, becaus she hath
not perform the command of the king ahasueru by the
chamberlains?  1:16 and memucan answer befor the king and the
princes, vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but
also to all the princes, and to all the peopl that are in all the
provinc of the king ahasuerus.

1:17 for thi deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women, so
that they shall despis their husband in their eyes, when it shall be
reported, the king ahasueru command vashti the queen to be brought
in befor him, but she came not.

1:18 likewis shall the ladi of persia and media say thi day unto
al the king' princes, which have heard of the deed of the queen.
thu shall there aris too much contempt and wrath.

1:19 If it pleas the king, let there go a royal command from him,
and let it be written among the law of the persian and the medes,
that it be not altered, that vashti come no more befor king
ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal estat unto anoth that is
bett than she.

1:20 and when the king' decre which he shall make shall be published
throughout all hi empire, (for it is great,) all the wive shall give
to their husband honour, both to great and small.

1:21 and the say pleas the king and the princes; and the king did
accord to the word of memucan: 1:22 for he sent letter into all
th king' provinces, into everi provinc accord to the writing
thereof, and to everi peopl after their language, that everi man
should bear rule in hi own house, and that it should be published
accord to the languag of everi people.

2:1 after these things, when the wrath of king ahasueru wa appeased,
h rememb vashti, and what she had done, and what wa decreed
against her.

2:2 then said the king' servant that minist unto him, let there
b fair young virgin sought for the king: 2:3 and let the king
appoint offic in all the provinc of hi kingdom, that they may
gath togeth all the fair young virgin unto shushan the palace, to
th hous of the women, unto the custodi of hege the king's
chamberlain, keeper of the women; and let their thing for
purif be given them: 2:4 and let the maiden which pleaseth the
k be queen instead of vashti.

and the thing pleas the king; and he did so.

2:5 now in shushan the palac there wa a certain jew, whose name was
mordecai, the son of jair, the son of shimei, the son of kish, a
benjamite; 2:6 who had been carri away from jerusalem with the
capt which had been carri away with jeconiah king of judah,
whom nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon had carri away.

2:7 and he brought up hadassah, that is, esther, hi uncle' daughter:
for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid wa fair and
beautiful; whom mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took
for hi own daughter.

2:8 So it came to pass, when the king' command and hi decre was
heard, and when mani maiden were gather togeth unto shushan the
palace, to the custodi of hegai, that esther wa brought also unto the
king' house, to the custodi of hegai, keeper of the women.

2:9 and the maiden pleas him, and she obtain kind of him; and
h speedili gave her her thing for purification, with such thing as
belong to her, and seven maidens, which were meet to be given her,
out of the king' house: and he prefer her and her maid unto the
best place of the hous of the women.

2:10 esther had not shew her peopl nor her kindred: for mordecai
had charg her that she should not shew it.

2:11 and mordecai walk everi day befor the court of the women's
house, to know how esther did, and what should becom of her.

2:12 now when everi maid' turn wa come to go in to king ahasuerus,
aft that she had been twelv months, accord to the manner of the
women, (for so were the day of their purif accomplished, to
wit, six month with oil of myrrh, and six month with sweet odours,
and with other thing for the purifi of the women;) 2:13 then thus
cam everi maiden unto the king; whatsoev she desir wa given her
to go with her out of the hous of the women unto the king' house.

2:14 In the even she went, and on the morrow she return into the
second hous of the women, to the custodi of shaashgaz, the king's
chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no
more, except the king delight in her, and that she were call by
name.

2:15 now when the turn of esther, the daughter of abihail the uncl of
mordecai, who had taken her for hi daughter, wa come to go in unto
th king, she requir noth but what hegai the king' chamberlain,
th keeper of the women, appointed. and esther obtain favour in the
sight of all them that look upon her.

2:16 So esther wa taken unto king ahasueru into hi hous royal in
th tenth month, which is the month tebeth, in the seventh year of his
reign.

2:17 and the king love esther abov all the women, and she obtained
grac and favour in hi sight more than all the virgins; so that he
set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of
vashti.

2:18 then the king made a great feast unto all hi princ and his
servants, even esther' feast; and he made a releas to the provinces,
and gave gifts, accord to the state of the king.

2:19 and when the virgin were gather togeth the second time, then
mordecai sat in the king' gate.

2:20 esther had not yet shew her kindr nor her people; as mordecai
had charg her: for esther did the command of mordecai, like as
when she wa brought up with him.

2:21 In those days, while mordecai sat in the king' gate, two of the
king' chamberlains, bigthan and teresh, of those which kept the door,
wer wroth, and sought to lay hand on the king ahasuerus.

2:22 and the thing wa known to mordecai, who told it unto esther the
queen; and esther certifi the king thereof in mordecai' name.

2:23 and when inquisit wa made of the matter, it wa found out;
therefor they were both hang on a tree: and it wa written in the
book of the chronicl befor the king.

3:1 after these thing did king ahasueru promot haman the son of
hammedatha the agagite, and advanc him, and set hi seat abov all
th princ that were with him.

3:2 and all the king' servants, that were in the king' gate, bowed,
and reverenc haman: for the king had so command concern him.
but mordecai bow not, nor did him reverence.

3:3 then the king' servants, which were in the king' gate, said unto
mordecai, whi transgressest thou the king' commandment?  3:4 now it
cam to pass, when they spake daili unto him, and he hearken not
unto them, that they told haman, to see whether mordecai' matters
would stand: for he had told them that he wa a jew.

3:5 and when haman saw that mordecai bow not, nor did him reverence,
then wa haman full of wrath.

3:6 and he thought scorn to lay hand on mordecai alone; for they had
shew him the peopl of mordecai: wherefor haman sought to destroy
al the jew that were throughout the whole kingdom of ahasuerus, even
th peopl of mordecai.

3:7 In the first month, that is, the month nisan, in the twelfth year
of king ahasuerus, they cast pur, that is, the lot, befor haman from
day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is,
th month adar.

3:8 and haman said unto king ahasuerus, there is a certain people
scatt abroad and dispers among the peopl in all the provinces
of thi kingdom; and their law are divers from all people; neither
keep they the king' laws: therefor it is not for the king' profit
to suffer them.

3:9 If it pleas the king, let it be written that they may be
destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand talent of silver to the hands
of those that have the charg of the business, to bring it into the
king' treasuries.

3:10 and the king took hi ring from hi hand, and gave it unto haman
th son of hammedatha the agagite, the jews' enemy.

3:11 and the king said unto haman, the silver is given to thee, the
peopl also, to do with them as it seemeth good to thee.

3:12 then were the king' scribe call on the thirteenth day of the
first month, and there wa written accord to all that haman had
command unto the king' lieutenants, and to the governor that were
ov everi province, and to the ruler of everi peopl of every
provinc accord to the write thereof, and to everi peopl after
their language; in the name of king ahasueru wa it written, and
seal with the king' ring.

3:13 and the letter were sent by post into all the king' provinces,
to destroy, to kill, and to caus to perish, all jews, both young and
old, littl children and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth
day of the twelfth month, which is the month adar, and to take the
spoil of them for a prey.

3:14 the copi of the write for a command to be given in every
provinc wa publish unto all people, that they should be ready
against that day.

3:15 the post went out, be hasten by the king' commandment, and
th decre wa given in shushan the palace. and the king and haman sat
down to drink; but the citi shushan wa perplexed.

4:1 when mordecai perceiv all that wa done, mordecai rent his
clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst
of the city, and cri with a loud and a bitter cry; 4:2 and came even
befor the king' gate: for none might enter into the king' gate
cloth with sackcloth.

4:3 and in everi province, whithersoev the king' command and
hi decre came, there wa great mourn among the jews, and fasting,
and weeping, and wailing; and mani lay in sackcloth and ashes.

4:4 So esther' maid and her chamberlain came and told it her. then
wa the queen exceedingli grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe
mordecai, and to take away hi sackcloth from him: but he receiv it
not.

4:5 then call esther for hatach, one of the king' chamberlains,
whom he had appoint to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment
to mordecai, to know what it was, and whi it was.

4:6 So hatach went forth to mordecai unto the street of the city,
which wa befor the king' gate.

4:7 and mordecai told him of all that had happen unto him, and of
th sum of the money that haman had promis to pay to the king's
treasuri for the jews, to destroy them.

4:8 also he gave him the copi of the write of the decre that was
given at shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto esther, and to
declar it unto her, and to charg her that she should go in unto the
king, to make supplic unto him, and to make request befor him
for her people.

4:9 and hatach came and told esther the word of mordecai.

4:10 again esther spake unto hatach, and gave him command unto
mordecai; 4:11 all the king' servants, and the peopl of the king's
provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or women, shall come
unto the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is one
law of hi to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall
hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but I have not been
cal to come in unto the king these thirti days.

4:12 and they told to mordecai esther' words.

4:13 then mordecai command to answer esther, think not with thyself
that thou shalt escap in the king' house, more than all the jews.

4:14 for if thou altogeth holdest thi peac at thi time, then shall
ther enlarg and deliver aris to the jew from another
place; but thou and thi father' hous shall be destroyed: and who
knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?
4:15 then esther bade them return mordecai thi answer, 4:16 go,
gath togeth all the jew that are present in shushan, and fast ye
for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and
mi maiden will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king,
which is not accord to the law: and if I perish, I perish.

4:17 So mordecai went hi way, and did accord to all that esther
had command him.

5:1 now it came to pass on the third day, that esther put on her royal
apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king' house, over
against the king' house: and the king sat upon hi royal throne in
th royal house, over against the gate of the house.

5:2 and it wa so, when the king saw esther the queen stand in the
court, that she obtain favour in hi sight: and the king held out to
esth the golden sceptr that wa in hi hand. So esther drew near,
and touch the top of the sceptre.

5:3 then said the king unto her, what wilt thou, queen esther? and
what is thi request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the
kingdom.

5:4 and esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, let the king
and haman come thi day unto the banquet that I have prepar for him.

5:5 then the king said, caus haman to make haste, that he may do as
esth hath said. So the king and haman came to the banquet that
esth had prepared.

5:6 and the king said unto esther at the banquet of wine, what is thy
petition? and it shall be grant thee: and what is thi request? even
to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.

5:7 then answer esther, and said, My petit and my request is; 5:8
if I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it pleas the
k to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and
haman come to the banquet that I shall prepar for them, and I will do
to morrow as the king hath said.

5:9 then went haman forth that day joy and with a glad heart: but
when haman saw mordecai in the king' gate, that he stood not up, nor
mov for him, he wa full of indign against mordecai.

5:10 nevertheless haman refrain himself: and when he came home, he
sent and call for hi friends, and zeresh hi wife.

5:11 and haman told them of the glori of hi riches, and the multitude
of hi children, and all the thing wherein the king had promot him,
and how he had advanc him abov the princ and servant of the
king.

5:12 haman said moreover, yea, esther the queen did let no man come in
with the king unto the banquet that she had prepar but myself; and
to morrow am I invit unto her also with the king.

5:13 yet all thi availeth me nothing, so long as I see mordecai the
jew sit at the king' gate.

5:14 then said zeresh hi wife and all hi friend unto him, let a
gallow be made of fifti cubit high, and to morrow speak thou unto
th king that mordecai may be hang thereon: then go thou in merrily
with the king unto the banquet. and the thing pleas haman; and he
caus the gallow to be made.

6:1 On that night could not the king sleep, and he command to bring
th book of record of the chronicles; and they were read befor the
king.

6:2 and it wa found written, that mordecai had told of bigthana and
teresh, two of the king' chamberlains, the keeper of the door, who
sought to lay hand on the king ahasuerus.

6:3 and the king said, what honour and digniti hath been done to
mordecai for this? then said the king' servant that minist unto
him, there is noth done for him.

6:4 and the king said, who is in the court? now haman wa come into
th outward court of the king' house, to speak unto the king to hang
mordecai on the gallow that he had prepar for him.

6:5 and the king' servant said unto him, behold, haman standeth in
th court. and the king said, let him come in.

6:6 So haman came in. and the king said unto him, what shall be done
unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? now haman thought in
hi heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to
myself?  6:7 and haman answer the king, for the man whom the king
delighteth to honour, 6:8 let the royal apparel be brought which the
k useth to wear, and the hors that the king rideth upon, and the
crown royal which is set upon hi head: 6:9 and let thi apparel and
hors be deliv to the hand of one of the king' most noble
princes, that they may array the man withal whom the king delighteth
to honour, and bring him on horseback through the street of the city,
and proclaim befor him, thu shall it be done to the man whom the
k delighteth to honour.

6:10 then the king said to haman, make haste, and take the apparel and
th horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to mordecai the jew, that
sitteth at the king' gate: let noth fail of all that thou hast
spoken.

6:11 then took haman the apparel and the horse, and array mordecai,
and brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and
proclaim befor him, thu shall it be done unto the man whom the
k delighteth to honour.

6:12 and mordecai came again to the king' gate. but haman hast to
hi hous mourning, and have hi head covered.

6:13 and haman told zeresh hi wife and all hi friend everi thing
that had befallen him. then said hi wise men and zeresh hi wife unto
him, If mordecai be of the seed of the jews, befor whom thou hast
begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely
fal befor him.

6:14 and while they were yet talk with him, came the king's
chamberlains, and hast to bring haman unto the banquet that esther
had prepared.

7:1 So the king and haman came to banquet with esther the queen.

7:2 and the king said again unto esther on the second day at the
banquet of wine, what is thi petition, queen esther? and it shall be
grant thee: and what is thi request? and it shall be performed, even
to the half of the kingdom.

7:3 then esther the queen answer and said, If I have found favour in
thi sight, O king, and if it pleas the king, let my life be given me
at my petition, and my peopl at my request: 7:4 for we are sold, i
and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. but if we
had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue,
although the enemi could not countervail the king' damage.

7:5 then the king ahasueru answer and said unto esther the queen,
who is he, and where is he, that durst presum in hi heart to do so?
7:6 and esther said, the adversari and enemi is thi wick haman.
then haman wa afraid befor the king and the queen.

7:7 and the king aris from the banquet of wine in hi wrath went
into the palac garden: and haman stood up to make request for his
lif to esther the queen; for he saw that there wa evil determined
against him by the king.

7:8 then the king return out of the palac garden into the place of
th banquet of wine; and haman wa fallen upon the bed whereon esther
was. then said the king, will he forc the queen also befor me in the
house? As the word went out of king' mouth, they cover haman's
face.

7:9 and harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said befor the king,
behold also, the gallow fifti cubit high, which haman had made for
mordecai, who spoken good for the king, standeth in the hous of
haman. then the king said, hang him thereon.

7:10 So they hang haman on the gallow that he had prepar for
mordecai. then wa the king' wrath pacified.

8:1 On that day did the king ahasueru give the hous of haman the
jews' enemi unto esther the queen. and mordecai came befor the king;
for esther had told what he wa unto her.

8:2 and the king took off hi ring, which he had taken from haman, and
gav it unto mordecai. and esther set mordecai over the hous of
haman.

8:3 and esther spake yet again befor the king, and fell down at his
feet, and besought him with tear to put away the mischief of haman
th agagite, and hi devic that he had devis against the jews.

8:4 then the king held out the golden sceptr toward esther. So esther
arose, and stood befor the king, 8:5 and said, If it pleas the king,
and if I have favour in hi sight, and the thing seem right befor the
king, and I be pleas in hi eyes, let it be written to revers the
lett devis by haman the son of hammedatha the agagite, which he
wrot to destroy the jew which are in all the king' provinces: 8:6
for how can I endur to see the evil that shall come unto my people?
or how can I endur to see the destruct of my kindred?  8:7 then
th king ahasueru said unto esther the queen and to mordecai the jew,
behold, I have given esther the hous of haman, and him they have
hang upon the gallows, becaus he laid hi hand upon the jews.

8:8 write ye also for the jews, as it liketh you, in the king' name,
and seal it with the king' ring: for the write which is written in
th king' name, and seal with the king' ring, may no man reverse.

8:9 then were the king' scribe call at that time in the third
month, that is, the month sivan, on the three and twentieth day
thereof; and it wa written accord to all that mordecai commanded
unto the jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputi and ruler of
th provinc which are from india unto ethiopia, an hundr twenty
and seven provinces, unto everi provinc accord to the writing
thereof, and unto everi peopl after their language, and to the jews
accord to their writing, and accord to their language.

8:10 and he wrote in the king ahasuerus' name, and seal it with the
king' ring, and sent letter by post on horseback, and rider on
mules, camels, and young dromedaries: 8:11 wherein the king granted
th jew which were in everi citi to gather themselv together, and
to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay and to caus to perish,
al the power of the peopl and provinc that would assault them, both
littl one and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey, 8:12
upon one day in all the provinc of king ahasuerus, namely, upon the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month adar.

8:13 the copi of the write for a command to be given in every
provinc wa publish unto all people, and that the jew should be
readi against that day to aveng themselv on their enemies.

8:14 So the post that rode upon mule and camel went out, being
hasten and press on by the king' commandment. and the decre was
given at shushan the palace.

8:15 and mordecai went out from the presenc of the king in royal
apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a
gar of fine linen and purple: and the citi of shushan rejoic and
wa glad.

8:16 the jew had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour.

8:17 and in everi province, and in everi city, whithersoev the
king' command and hi decre came, the jew had joy and gladness,
a feast and a good day. and mani of the peopl of the land became
jews; for the fear of the jew fell upon them.

9:1 now in the twelfth month, that is, the month adar, on the
thirteenth day of the same, when the king' command and hi decree
drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemi of the
jew hope to have power over them, (though it wa turn to the
contrary, that the jew had rule over them that hate them;) 9:2 the
jew gather themselv togeth in their citi throughout all the
provinc of the king ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their
hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell upon
al people.

9:3 and all the ruler of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the
deputies, and offic of the king, help the jews; becaus the fear
of mordecai fell upon them.

9:4 for mordecai wa great in the king' house, and hi fame went out
throughout all the provinces: for thi man mordecai wax greater and
greater.

9:5 thu the jew smote all their enemi with the stroke of the
sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto
thos that hate them.

9:6 and in shushan the palac the jew slew and destroy five hundred
men.

9:7 and parshandatha, and dalphon, and aspatha, 9:8 and poratha, and
adalia, and aridatha, 9:9 and parmashta, and arisai, and aridai, and
vajezatha, 9:10 the ten son of haman the son of hammedatha, the enemy
of the jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand.

9:11 On that day the number of those that were slain in shushan the
palac wa brought befor the king.

9:12 and the king said unto esther the queen, the jew have slain and
destroy five hundr men in shushan the palace, and the ten son of
haman; what have they done in the rest of the king' provinces? now
what is thi petition? and it shall be grant thee: or what is thy
request further? and it shall be done.

9:13 then said esther, If it pleas the king, let it be grant to the
jew which are in shushan to do to morrow also accord unto this
day' decree, and let haman' ten son be hang upon the gallows.

9:14 and the king command it so to be done: and the decre wa given
at shushan; and they hang haman' ten sons.

9:15 for the jew that were in shushan gather themselv togeth on
th fourteenth day also of the month adar, and slew three hundr men
at shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand.

9:16 but the other jew that were in the king' provinc gathered
themselv together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from
their enemies, and slew of their foe seventi and five thousand, but
they laid not their hand on the prey, 9:17 On the thirteenth day of
th month adar; and on the fourteenth day of the same rest they, and
mad it a day of feast and gladness.

9:18 but the jew that were at shushan assembl togeth on the
thirteenth day thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the
fifteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting
and gladness.

9:19 therefor the jew of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled
towns, made the fourteenth day of the month adar a day of glad and
feasting, and a good day, and of send portion one to another.

9:20 and mordecai wrote these things, and sent letter unto all the
jew that were in all the provinc of the king ahasuerus, both nigh
and far, 9:21 To stablish thi among them, that they should keep the
fourteenth day of the month adar, and the fifteenth day of the same,
yearly, 9:22 As the day wherein the jew rest from their enemies,
and the month which wa turn unto them from sorrow to joy, and from
mourn into a good day: that they should make them day of feasting
and joy, and of send portion one to another, and gift to the
poor.

9:23 and the jew undertook to do as they had begun, and as mordecai
had written unto them; 9:24 becaus haman the son of hammedatha, the
agagite, the enemi of all the jews, had devis against the jew to
destroy them, and had cast pur, that is, the lot, to consum them, and
to destroy them; 9:25 but when esther came befor the king, he
command by letter that hi wick device, which he devis against
th jews, should return upon hi own head, and that he and hi sons
should be hang on the gallows.

9:26 wherefor they call these day purim after the name of pur.

therefor for all the word of thi letter, and of that which they had
seen concern thi matter, and which had come unto them, 9:27 the
jew ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all
such as join themselv unto them, so as it should not fail, that
they would keep these two day accord to their writing, and
accord to their appoint time everi year; 9:28 and that these days
should be rememb and kept throughout everi generation, every
family, everi province, and everi city; and that these day of purim
should not fail from among the jews, nor the memori of them perish
from their seed.

9:29 then esther the queen, the daughter of abihail, and mordecai the
jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm thi second letter of purim.

9:30 and he sent the letter unto all the jews, to the hundr twenty
and seven provinc of the kingdom of ahasuerus, with word of peace
and truth, 9:31 To confirm these day of purim in their times
appointed, accord as mordecai the jew and esther the queen had
enjoin them, and as they had decre for themselv and for their
seed, the matter of the fast and their cry.

9:32 and the decre of esther confirm these matter of purim; and it
wa written in the book.

10:1 and the king ahasueru laid a tribut upon the land, and upon the
isl of the sea.

10:2 and all the act of hi power and of hi might, and the
declar of the great of mordecai, whereunto the king advanced
him, are they not written in the book of the chronicl of the kings
of media and persia?  10:3 for mordecai the jew wa next unto king
ahasuerus, and great among the jews, and accept of the multitud of
hi brethren, seek the wealth of hi people, and speak peac to
al hi seed.




th book of job


1:1 there wa a man in the land of uz, whose name wa job; and that
man wa perfect and upright, and one that fear god, and eschew evil.

1:2 and there were born unto him seven son and three daughters.

1:3 hi substanc also wa seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
camels, and five hundr yoke of oxen, and five hundr she asses, and
a veri great household; so that thi man wa the greatest of all the
men of the east.

1:4 and hi son went and feast in their houses, everi one hi day;
and sent and call for their three sister to eat and to drink with
them.

1:5 and it wa so, when the day of their feast were gone about,
that job sent and sanctifi them, and rose up earli in the morning,
and offer burnt offer accord to the number of them all: for
job said, It may be that my son have sinned, and curs god in their
hearts. thu did job continually.

1:6 now there wa a day when the son of god came to present
themselv befor the lord, and satan came also among them.

1:7 and the lord said unto satan, whenc comest thou? then satan
answ the lord, and said, from go to and fro in the earth, and
from walk up and down in it.

1:8 and the lord said unto satan, hast thou consid my servant job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth god, and escheweth evil?  1:9 then satan
answ the lord, and said, doth job fear god for nought?  1:10 hast
not thou made an hedg about him, and about hi house, and about all
that he hath on everi side? thou hast bless the work of hi hands,
and hi substanc is increas in the land.

1:11 but put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he
wil curs thee to thi face.

1:12 and the lord said unto satan, behold, all that he hath is in thy
power; onli upon himself put not forth thine hand. So satan went forth
from the presenc of the lord.

1:13 and there wa a day when hi son and hi daughter were eating
and drink wine in their eldest brother' house: 1:14 and there came
a messeng unto job, and said, the oxen were plowing, and the asses
feed besid them: 1:15 and the sabean fell upon them, and took
them away; yea, they have slain the servant with the edg of the
sword; and I onli am escap alon to tell thee.

1:16 while he wa yet speaking, there came also another, and said, the
fir of god is fallen from heaven, and hath burn up the sheep, and
th servants, and consum them; and I onli am escap alon to tell
thee.

1:17 while he wa yet speaking, there came also another, and said, the
chaldean made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have
carri them away, yea, and slain the servant with the edg of the
sword; and I onli am escap alon to tell thee.

1:18 while he wa yet speaking, there came also another, and said, thy
son and thi daughter were eat and drink wine in their eldest
brother' house: 1:19 and, behold, there came a great wind from the
wilderness, and smote the four corner of the house, and it fell upon
th young men, and they are dead; and I onli am escap alon to tell
thee.

1:20 then job arose, and rent hi mantle, and shave hi head, and
fel down upon the ground, and worshipped, 1:21 and said, nake came i
out of my mother' womb, and nake shall I return thither: the lord
gave, and the lord hath taken away; bless be the name of the lord.

1:22 In all thi job sin not, nor charg god foolishly.

2:1 again there wa a day when the son of god came to present
themselv befor the lord, and satan came also among them to present
himself befor the lord.

2:2 and the lord said unto satan, from whenc comest thou? and satan
answ the lord, and said, from go to and fro in the earth, and
from walk up and down in it.

2:3 and the lord said unto satan, hast thou consid my servant job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth god, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth
fast hi integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy
him without cause.

2:4 and satan answer the lord, and said, skin for skin, yea, all
that a man hath will he give for hi life.

2:5 but put forth thine hand now, and touch hi bone and hi flesh,
and he will curs thee to thi face.

2:6 and the lord said unto satan, behold, he is in thine hand; but
sav hi life.

2:7 So went satan forth from the presenc of the lord, and smote job
with sore boil from the sole of hi foot unto hi crown.

2:8 and he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat
down among the ashes.

2:9 then said hi wife unto him, dost thou still retain thine
integrity?  curs god, and die.

2:10 but he said unto her, thou speakest as one of the foolish women
speaketh. what? shall we receiv good at the hand of god, and shall we
not receiv evil? In all thi did not job sin with hi lips.

2:11 now when job' three friend heard of all thi evil that wa come
upon him, they came everi one from hi own place; eliphaz the
temanite, and bildad the shuhite, and zophar the naamathite: for they
had made an appoint togeth to come to mourn with him and to
comfort him.

2:12 and when they lift up their eye afar off, and knew him not,
they lift up their voice, and wept; and they rent everi one his
mantle, and sprinkl dust upon their head toward heaven.

2:13 So they sat down with him upon the ground seven day and seven
nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that hi grief
wa veri great.

3:1 after thi open job hi mouth, and curs hi day.

3:2 and job spake, and said, 3:3 let the day perish wherein I was
born, and the night in which it wa said, there is a man child
conceived.

3:4 let that day be darkness; let not god regard it from above,
neith let the light shine upon it.

3:5 let dark and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell
upon it; let the black of the day terrifi it.

3:6 As for that night, let dark seiz upon it; let it not be
join unto the day of the year, let it not come into the number of
th months.

3:7 lo, let that night be solitary, let no joy voic come therein.

3:8 let them curs it that curs the day, who are readi to rais up
their mourning.

3:9 let the star of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for
light, but have none; neither let it see the dawn of the day: 3:10
becaus it shut not up the door of my mother' womb, nor hid sorrow
from mine eyes.

3:11 whi die I not from the womb? whi did I not give up the ghost
when I came out of the belly?  3:12 whi did the knee prevent me? or
whi the breast that I should suck?  3:13 for now should I have lain
stil and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest,
3:14 with king and counsellor of the earth, which build desolate
plac for themselves; 3:15 Or with princ that had gold, who filled
their hous with silver: 3:16 Or as an hidden untim birth I had
not been; as infant which never saw light.

3:17 there the wick ceas from troubling; and there the weari be at
rest.

3:18 there the prison rest together; they hear not the voic of the
oppressor.

3:19 the small and great are there; and the servant is free from his
master.

3:20 wherefor is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto
th bitter in soul; 3:21 which long for death, but it cometh not; and
dig for it more than for hid treasures; 3:22 which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave?  3:23 whi is
light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom god hath hedg in?
3:24 for my sigh cometh befor I eat, and my roar are poured
out like the waters.

3:25 for the thing which I greatli fear is come upon me, and that
which I wa afraid of is come unto me.

3:26 I wa not in safety, neither had I rest, neither wa I quiet; yet
troubl came.

4:1 then eliphaz the temanit answer and said, 4:2 If we assay to
commun with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself
from speaking?  4:3 behold, thou hast instruct many, and thou hast
strengthen the weak hands.

4:4 thi word have upholden him that wa falling, and thou hast
strengthen the feebl knees.

4:5 but now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee,
and thou art troubled.

4:6 Is not thi thi fear, thi confidence, thi hope, and the
upright of thi ways?  4:7 remember, I pray thee, who ever
perished, be innocent? or where were the righteou cut off?  4:8
even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap
th same.

4:9 By the blast of god they perish, and by the breath of hi nostrils
ar they consumed.

4:10 the roar of the lion, and the voic of the fierc lion, and
th teeth of the young lions, are broken.

4:11 the old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion's
whelp are scatter abroad.

4:12 now a thing wa secretli brought to me, and mine ear receiv a
littl thereof.

4:13 In thought from the vision of the night, when deep sleep
falleth on men, 4:14 fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all
mi bone to shake.

4:15 then a spirit pass befor my face; the hair of my flesh stood
up: 4:16 It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an
imag wa befor mine eyes, there wa silence, and I heard a voice,
saying, 4:17 shall mortal man be more just than god? shall a man be
mor pure than hi maker?  4:18 behold, he put no trust in his
servants; and hi angel he charg with folly: 4:19 how much less in
them that dwell in hous of clay, whose foundat is in the dust,
which are crush befor the moth?  4:20 they are destroy from
morn to evening: they perish for ever without ani regard it.

4:21 doth not their excel which is in them go away? they die,
even without wisdom.

5:1 call now, if there be ani that will answer thee; and to which of
th saint wilt thou turn?  5:2 for wrath killeth the foolish man, and
envi slayeth the silli one.

5:3 I have seen the foolish take root: but suddenli I curs his
habitation.

5:4 hi children are far from safety, and they are crush in the
gate, neither is there ani to deliv them.

5:5 whose harvest the hungri eateth up, and taketh it even out of the
thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance.

5:6 although afflict cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth
troubl spring out of the ground; 5:7 yet man is born unto trouble, as
th spark fli upward.

5:8 I would seek unto god, and unto god would I commit my cause: 5:9
which doeth great thing and unsearchable; marvel thing without
number: 5:10 who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth water upon
th fields: 5:11 To set up on high those that be low; that those which
mourn may be exalt to safety.

5:12 He disappointeth the devic of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise.

5:13 He taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of
th froward is carri headlong.

5:14 they meet with dark in the day time, and grope in the noonday
a in the night.

5:15 but he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from
th hand of the mighty.

5:16 So the poor hath hope, and iniqu stoppeth her mouth.

5:17 behold, happi is the man whom god correcteth: therefor despise
not thou the chasten of the almighty: 5:18 for he maketh sore, and
bindeth up: he woundeth, and hi hand make whole.

5:19 He shall deliv thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall
no evil touch thee.

5:20 In famin he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the
pow of the sword.

5:21 thou shalt be hid from the scourg of the tongue: neither shalt
thou be afraid of destruct when it cometh.

5:22 At destruct and famin thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be
afraid of the beast of the earth.

5:23 for thou shalt be in leagu with the stone of the field: and the
beast of the field shall be at peac with thee.

5:24 and thou shalt know that thi tabernacl shall be in peace; and
thou shalt visit thi habitation, and shalt not sin.

5:25 thou shalt know also that thi seed shall be great, and thine
offspr as the grass of the earth.

5:26 thou shalt come to thi grave in a full age, like as a shock of
corn cometh in in hi season.

5:27 Lo this, we have search it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it
for thi good.

6:1 but job answer and said, 6:2 Oh that my grief were throughly
weighed, and my calam laid in the balanc together!  6:3 for now
it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefor my word are
swallow up.

6:4 for the arrow of the almighti are within me, the poison whereof
drinketh up my spirit: the terror of god do set themselv in array
against me.

6:5 doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over
hi fodder?  6:6 can that which is unsavouri be eaten without salt? or
i there ani tast in the white of an egg?  6:7 the thing that my
soul refus to touch are as my sorrow meat.

6:8 Oh that I might have my request; and that god would grant me the
th that I long for!  6:9 even that it would pleas god to destroy
me; that he would let loos hi hand, and cut me off!  6:10 then
should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let
him not spare; for I have not conceal the word of the holi one.

6:11 what is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end,
that I should prolong my life?  6:12 Is my strength the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass?  6:13 Is not my help in me? and is
wisdom driven quit from me?  6:14 To him that is afflict pity
should be shew from hi friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the
almighty.

6:15 My brethren have dealt deceit as a brook, and as the stream
of brook they pass away; 6:16 which are blackish by reason of the
ice, and wherein the snow is hid: 6:17 what time they wax warm, they
vanish: when it is hot, they are consum out of their place.

6:18 the path of their way are turn aside; they go to nothing, and
perish.

6:19 the troop of tema looked, the compani of sheba wait for
them.

6:20 they were confound becaus they had hoped; they came thither,
and were ashamed.

6:21 for now ye are nothing; ye see my cast down, and are afraid.

6:22 did I say, bring unto me? or, give a reward for me of your
substance?  6:23 or, deliv me from the enemy' hand? or, redeem me
from the hand of the mighty?  6:24 teach me, and I will hold my
tongue: and caus me to understand wherein I have erred.

6:25 how forcibl are right words! but what doth your argu reprove?
6:26 Do ye imagin to reprov words, and the speech of one that is
desperate, which are as wind?  6:27 yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless,
and ye dig a pit for your friend.

6:28 now therefor be content, look upon me; for it is evid unto
y if I lie.

6:29 return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my
right is in it.

6:30 Is there iniqu in my tongue? cannot my tast discern perverse
things?  7:1 Is there not an appoint time to man upon earth? are not
hi day also like the day of an hireling?  7:2 As a servant
earnestli desireth the shadow, and as an hirel looketh for the
reward of hi work: 7:3 So am I made to possess month of vanity, and
wearisom night are appoint to me.

7:4 when I lie down, I say, when shall I arise, and the night be gone?
and I am full of toss to and fro unto the dawn of the day.

7:5 My flesh is cloth with worm and clod of dust; my skin is
broken, and becom loathsome.

7:6 My day are swifter than a weaver' shuttle, and are spent without
hope.

7:7 O rememb that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good.

7:8 the eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes
ar upon me, and I am not.

7:9 As the cloud is consum and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down
to the grave shall come up no more.

7:10 He shall return no more to hi house, neither shall hi place
know him ani more.

7:11 therefor I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitter of my soul.

7:12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me?  7:13
when I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall eas my
complaints; 7:14 then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
through visions: 7:15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death
rath than my life.

7:16 I loath it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days
ar vanity.

7:17 what is man, that thou shouldest magnifi him? and that thou
shouldest set thine heart upon him?  7:18 and that thou shouldest
visit him everi morning, and tri him everi moment?  7:19 how long wilt
thou not depart from me, nor let me alon till I swallow down my
spittle?  7:20 I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserv of men?  whi hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that I am a burden to myself?  7:21 and whi dost thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away my iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the
dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.

8:1 then answer bildad the shuhite, and said, 8:2 how long wilt thou
speak these things? and how long shall the word of thi mouth be like
a strong wind?  8:3 doth god pervert judgment? or doth the almighty
pervert justice?  8:4 If thi children have sin against him, and he
hav cast them away for their transgression; 8:5 If thou wouldest seek
unto god betimes, and make thi supplic to the almighty; 8:6 if
thou wert pure and upright; sure now he would awak for thee, and
mak the habit of thi righteous prosperous.

8:7 though thi begin wa small, yet thi latter end should greatly
increase.

8:8 for enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepar thyself
to the search of their fathers: 8:9 (for we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, becaus our day upon earth are a shadow:) 8:10 shall
not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter word out of their
heart?  8:11 can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow
without water?  8:12 whilst it is yet in hi greenness, and not cut
down, it withereth befor ani other herb.

8:13 So are the path of all that forget god; and the hypocrite' hope
shal perish: 8:14 whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall
b a spider' web.

8:15 He shall lean upon hi house, but it shall not stand: he shall
hold it fast, but it shall not endure.

8:16 He is green befor the sun, and hi branch shooteth forth in his
garden.

8:17 hi root are wrap about the heap, and seeth the place of
stones.

8:18 If he destroy him from hi place, then it shall deni him, saying,
i have not seen thee.

8:19 behold, thi is the joy of hi way, and out of the earth shall
oth grow.

8:20 behold, god will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers: 8:21 till he fill thi mouth with laughing, and
thi lip with rejoicing.

8:22 they that hate thee shall be cloth with shame; and the dwelling
plac of the wick shall come to nought.

9:1 then job answer and said, 9:2 I know it is so of a truth: but
how should man be just with god?  9:3 If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand.

9:4 He is wise in heart, and mighti in strength: who hath hardened
himself against him, and hath prospered?  9:5 which removeth the
mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in hi anger.

9:6 which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillar thereof
tremble.

9:7 which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the
stars.

9:8 which alon spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves
of the sea.

9:9 which maketh arcturus, orion, and pleiades, and the chamber of
th south.

9:10 which doeth great thing past find out; yea, and wonders
without number.

9:11 lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but i
perc him not.

9:12 behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto
him, what doest thou?  9:13 If god will not withdraw hi anger, the
proud helper do stoop under him.

9:14 how much less shall I answer him, and choos out my word to
reason with him?  9:15 whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not
answer, but I would make supplic to my judge.

9:16 If I had called, and he had answer me; yet would I not believe
that he had hearken unto my voice.

9:17 for he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds
without cause.

9:18 He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with
bitterness.

9:19 If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who
shal set me a time to plead?  9:20 If I justifi myself, mine own
mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse.

9:21 though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would
despis my life.

9:22 thi is one thing, therefor I said it, He destroyeth the perfect
and the wicked.

9:23 If the scourg slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the
innocent.

9:24 the earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the
fac of the judg thereof; if not, where, and who is he?  9:25 now
mi day are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good.

9:26 they are pass away as the swift ships: as the eagl that
hasteth to the prey.

9:27 If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leav off my
heaviness, and comfort myself: 9:28 I am afraid of all my sorrows, i
know that thou wilt not hold me innocent.

9:29 If I be wicked, whi then labour I in vain?  9:30 If I wash myself
with snow water, and make my hand never so clean; 9:31 yet shalt thou
plung me in the ditch, and mine own cloth shall abhor me.

9:32 for he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we
should come togeth in judgment.

9:33 neither is there ani daysman betwixt us, that might lay hi hand
upon us both.

9:34 let him take hi rod away from me, and let not hi fear terrify
me: 9:35 then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with
me.

10:1 My soul is weari of my life; I will leav my complaint upon
myself; I will speak in the bitter of my soul.

10:2 I will say unto god, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefor thou
contendest with me.

10:3 Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou
shouldest despis the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel
of the wicked?  10:4 hast thou eye of flesh? or seest thou as man
seeth?  10:5 are thi day as the day of man? are thi year as man's
days, 10:6 that thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest
aft my sin?  10:7 thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is
non that can deliv out of thine hand.

10:8 thine hand have made me and fashion me togeth round about;
yet thou dost destroy me.

10:9 remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and
wilt thou bring me into dust again?  10:10 hast thou not pour me out
a milk, and curdl me like cheese?  10:11 thou hast cloth me with
skin and flesh, and hast fenc me with bone and sinews.

10:12 thou hast grant me life and favour, and thi visit hath
preserv my spirit.

10:13 and these thing hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this
i with thee.

10:14 If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from
min iniquity.

10:15 If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will i
not lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefor see thou mine
affliction; 10:16 for it increaseth. thou huntest me as a fierc lion:
and again thou shewest thyself marvel upon me.

10:17 thou renewest thi wit against me, and increasest thine
indign upon me; chang and war are against me.

10:18 wherefor then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? oh
that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!  10:19 I should
hav been as though I had not been; I should have been carri from
th womb to the grave.

10:20 are not my day few? ceas then, and let me alone, that I may
tak comfort a little, 10:21 befor I go whenc I shall not return,
even to the land of dark and the shadow of death; 10:22 A land of
darkness, as dark itself; and of the shadow of death, without any
order, and where the light is as darkness.

11:1 then answer zophar the naamathite, and said, 11:2 should not
th multitud of word be answered? and should a man full of talk be
justified?  11:3 should thi lie make men hold their peace? and when
thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?  11:4 for thou hast
said, My doctrin is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.

11:5 but oh that god would speak, and open hi lip against thee; 11:6
and that he would shew thee the secret of wisdom, that they are
doubl to that which is! know therefor that god exacteth of thee less
than thine iniqu deserveth.

11:7 canst thou by search find out god? canst thou find out the
almighti unto perfection?  11:8 It is as high as heaven; what canst
thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know?  11:9 the measure
thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.

11:10 If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can
hind him?  11:11 for he knoweth vain men: he seeth wicked also;
wil he not then consid it?  11:12 for vain men would be wise,
though man be born like a wild ass' colt.

11:13 If thou prepar thine heart, and stretch out thine hand toward
him; 11:14 If iniqu be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
wicked dwell in thi tabernacles.

11:15 for then shalt thou lift up thi face without spot; yea, thou
shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear: 11:16 becaus thou shalt forget
thi misery, and rememb it as water that pass away: 11:17 and thine
ag shall be clearer than the noonday: thou shalt shine forth, thou
shalt be as the morning.

11:18 and thou shalt be secure, becaus there is hope; yea, thou shalt
dig about thee, and thou shalt take thi rest in safety.

11:19 also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea,
mani shall make suit unto thee.

11:20 but the eye of the wick shall fail, and they shall not
escape, and their hope shall be as the give up of the ghost.

12:1 and job answer and said, 12:2 No doubt but ye are the people,
and wisdom shall die with you.

12:3 but I have understand as well as you; I am not inferior to
you: yea, who knoweth not such thing as these?  12:4 I am as one
mock of hi neighbour, who calleth upon god, and he answereth him:
th just upright man is laugh to scorn.

12:5 He that is readi to slip with hi feet is as a lamp despis in
th thought of him that is at ease.

12:6 the tabernacl of robber prosper, and they that provok god are
secure; into whose hand god bringeth abundantly.

12:7 but ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls
of the air, and they shall tell thee: 12:8 Or speak to the earth, and
it shall teach thee: and the fish of the sea shall declar unto
thee.

12:9 who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the lord hath
wrought this?  12:10 In whose hand is the soul of everi live thing,
and the breath of all mankind.

12:11 doth not the ear tri words? and the mouth tast hi meat?  12:12
with the ancient is wisdom; and in length of day understanding.

12:13 with him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and
understanding.

12:14 behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he
shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening.

12:15 behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dri up: also he
sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth.

12:16 with him is strength and wisdom: the deceiv and the deceiver
ar his.

12:17 He leadeth counsellor away spoiled, and maketh the judges
fools.

12:18 He looseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loin with a
girdle.

12:19 He leadeth princ away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty.

12:20 He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the
understand of the aged.

12:21 He poureth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of
th mighty.

12:22 He discovereth deep thing out of darkness, and bringeth out to
light the shadow of death.

12:23 He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the
nations, and straiteneth them again.

12:24 He taketh away the heart of the chief of the peopl of the
earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilder where there is no
way.

12:25 they grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to
stagg like a drunken man.

13:1 lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and
understood it.

13:2 what ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto
you.

13:3 sure I would speak to the almighty, and I desir to reason with
god.

13:4 but ye are forger of lies, ye are all physician of no value.

13:5 O that ye would altogeth hold your peace! and it should be your
wisdom.

13:6 hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the plead of my lips.

13:7 will ye speak wickedli for god? and talk deceit for him?
13:8 will ye accept hi person? will ye contend for god?  13:9 Is it
good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do
y so mock him?  13:10 He will sure reprov you, if ye do secretly
accept persons.

13:11 shall not hi excel make you afraid? and hi dread fall
upon you?  13:12 your remembr are like unto ashes, your bodi to
bodi of clay.

13:13 hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on
m what will.

13:14 wherefor do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in
min hand?  13:15 though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but i
wil maintain mine own way befor him.

13:16 He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrit shall not come
befor him.

13:17 hear dilig my speech, and my declar with your ears.

13:18 behold now, I have order my cause; I know that I shall be
justified.

13:19 who is he that will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue,
i shall give up the ghost.

13:20 onli do not two thing unto me: then will I not hide myself from
thee.

13:21 withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thi dread make me
afraid.

13:22 then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer
th me.

13:23 how mani are mine iniqu and sins? make me to know my
transgress and my sin.

13:24 wherefor hidest thou thi face, and holdest me for thine enemy?
13:25 wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue
th dri stubble?  13:26 for thou writest bitter thing against me, and
makest me to possess the iniqu of my youth.

13:27 thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly
unto all my paths; thou settest a print upon the heel of my feet.

13:28 and he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth
eaten.

14:1 man that is born of a woman is of few day and full of trouble.

14:2 He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as
a shadow, and continueth not.

14:3 and doth thou open thine eye upon such an one, and bringest me
into judgment with thee?  14:4 who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one.

14:5 see hi day are determined, the number of hi month are with
thee, thou hast appoint hi bound that he cannot pass; 14:6 turn
from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling,
hi day.

14:7 for there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will
sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.

14:8 though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock
thereof die in the ground; 14:9 yet through the scent of water it will
bud, and bring forth bough like a plant.

14:10 but man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost,
and where is he?  14:11 As the water fail from the sea, and the flood
decayeth and drieth up: 14:12 So man lieth down, and riseth not: till
th heaven be no more, they shall not awake, nor be rais out of
their sleep.

14:13 O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest
keep me secret, until thi wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me
a set time, and rememb me!  14:14 If a man die, shall he live again?
al the day of my appoint time will I wait, till my chang come.

14:15 thou shalt call, and I will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire
to the work of thine hands.

14:16 for now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my
sin?  14:17 My transgress is seal up in a bag, and thou sewest up
min iniquity.

14:18 and sure the mountain fall cometh to nought, and the rock
i remov out of hi place.

14:19 the water wear the stones: thou washest away the thing which
grow out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of
man.

14:20 thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou
changest hi countenance, and sendest him away.

14:21 hi son come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are
brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them.

14:22 but hi flesh upon him shall have pain, and hi soul within him
shal mourn.

15:1 then answer eliphaz the temanite, and said, 15:2 should a wise
man utter vain knowledge, and fill hi belli with the east wind?  15:3
should he reason with unprofit talk? or with speech wherewith he
can do no good?  15:4 yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest
pray befor god.

15:5 for thi mouth uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the
tongu of the crafty.

15:6 thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips
testifi against thee.

15:7 art thou the first man that wa born? or wast thou made before
th hills?  15:8 hast thou heard the secret of god? and dost thou
restrain wisdom to thyself?  15:9 what knowest thou, that we know not?
what understandest thou, which is not in us?  15:10 with us are both
th grayhead and veri age men, much elder than thi father.

15:11 are the consol of god small with thee? is there ani secret
th with thee?  15:12 whi doth thine heart carri thee away? and what
do thi eye wink at, 15:13 that thou turnest thi spirit against god,
and lettest such word go out of thi mouth?  15:14 what is man, that
h should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be
righteous?  15:15 behold, he putteth no trust in hi saints; yea, the
heaven are not clean in hi sight.

15:16 how much more abomin and filthi is man, which drinketh
iniqu like water?  15:17 I will shew thee, hear me; and that which
i have seen I will declare; 15:18 which wise men have told from their
fathers, and have not hid it: 15:19 unto whom alon the earth was
given, and no stranger pass among them.

15:20 the wick man travaileth with pain all hi days, and the number
of year is hidden to the oppressor.

15:21 A dread sound is in hi ears: in prosper the destroyer
shal come upon him.

15:22 He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is
wait for of the sword.

15:23 He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, where is it? he knoweth
that the day of dark is readi at hi hand.

15:24 troubl and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail
against him, as a king readi to the battle.

15:25 for he stretcheth out hi hand against god, and strengtheneth
himself against the almighty.

15:26 He runneth upon him, even on hi neck, upon the thick boss of
hi bucklers: 15:27 becaus he covereth hi face with hi fatness, and
maketh collop of fat on hi flanks.

15:28 and he dwelleth in desol cities, and in hous which no man
inhabiteth, which are readi to becom heaps.

15:29 He shall not be rich, neither shall hi substanc continue,
neith shall he prolong the perfect thereof upon the earth.

15:30 He shall not depart out of darkness; the flame shall dri up his
branches, and by the breath of hi mouth shall he go away.

15:31 let not him that is deceiv trust in vanity: for vaniti shall
b hi recompence.

15:32 It shall be accomplish befor hi time, and hi branch shall
not be green.

15:33 He shall shake off hi unrip grape as the vine, and shall cast
off hi flower as the olive.

15:34 for the congreg of hypocrit shall be desolate, and fire
shal consum the tabernacl of bribery.

15:35 they conceiv mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly
prepareth deceit.

16:1 then job answer and said, 16:2 I have heard mani such things:
miser comfort are ye all.

16:3 shall vain word have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou
answerest?  16:4 I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my
soul' stead, I could heap up word against you, and shake mine head
at you.

16:5 but I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the move of my
lip should asswag your grief.

16:6 though I speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though I forbear,
what am I eased?  16:7 but now he hath made me weary: thou hast made
desol all my company.

16:8 and thou hast fill me with wrinkles, which is a wit against
me: and my lean rise up in me beareth wit to my face.

16:9 He teareth me in hi wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me
with hi teeth; mine enemi sharpeneth hi eye upon me.

16:10 they have gape upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me
upon the cheek reproachfully; they have gather themselv together
against me.

16:11 god hath deliv me to the ungodly, and turn me over into
th hand of the wicked.

16:12 I wa at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken
m by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for hi mark.

16:13 hi archer compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins
asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the ground.

16:14 He breaketh me with breach upon breach, he runneth upon me like
a giant.

16:15 I have sew sackcloth upon my skin, and defil my horn in the
dust.

16:16 My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelid is the shadow of
death; 16:17 not for ani injustic in mine hands: also my prayer is
pure.

16:18 O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cri have no place.

16:19 also now, behold, my wit is in heaven, and my record is on
high.

16:20 My friend scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tear unto god.

16:21 O that one might plead for a man with god, as a man pleadeth for
hi neighbour!  16:22 when a few year are come, then I shall go the
way whenc I shall not return.

17:1 My breath is corrupt, my day are extinct, the grave are ready
for me.

17:2 are there not mocker with me? and doth not mine eye continu in
their provocation?  17:3 lay down now, put me in a sureti with thee;
who is he that will strike hand with me?  17:4 for thou hast hid
their heart from understanding: therefor shalt thou not exalt them.

17:5 He that speaketh flatteri to hi friends, even the eye of his
children shall fail.

17:6 He hath made me also a byword of the people; and aforetim I was
a a tabret.

17:7 mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my member are
a a shadow.

17:8 upright men shall be astoni at this, and the innoc shall
stir up himself against the hypocrite.

17:9 the righteou also shall hold on hi way, and he that hath clean
hand shall be stronger and stronger.

17:10 but as for you all, do ye return, and come now: for I cannot
find one wise man among you.

17:11 My day are past, my purpos are broken off, even the thoughts
of my heart.

17:12 they chang the night into day: the light is short becaus of
darkness.

17:13 If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the
darkness.

17:14 I have said to corruption, thou art my father: to the worm, thou
art my mother, and my sister.

17:15 and where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?
17:16 they shall go down to the bar of the pit, when our rest
togeth is in the dust.

18:1 then answer bildad the shuhite, and said, 18:2 how long will it
b ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterward we will speak.

18:3 wherefor are we count as beasts, and reput vile in your
sight?  18:4 He teareth himself in hi anger: shall the earth be
forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be remov out of hi place?
18:5 yea, the light of the wick shall be put out, and the spark of
hi fire shall not shine.

18:6 the light shall be dark in hi tabernacle, and hi candl shall
b put out with him.

18:7 the step of hi strength shall be straitened, and hi own
counsel shall cast him down.

18:8 for he is cast into a net by hi own feet, and he walketh upon a
snare.

18:9 the gin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall prevail
against him.

18:10 the snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in
th way.

18:11 terror shall make him afraid on everi side, and shall drive him
to hi feet.

18:12 hi strength shall be hungerbitten, and destruct shall be
readi at hi side.

18:13 It shall devour the strength of hi skin: even the firstborn of
death shall devour hi strength.

18:14 hi confid shall be root out of hi tabernacle, and it
shal bring him to the king of terrors.

18:15 It shall dwell in hi tabernacle, becaus it is none of his:
brimston shall be scatter upon hi habitation.

18:16 hi root shall be dri up beneath, and abov shall hi branch
b cut off.

18:17 hi remembr shall perish from the earth, and he shall have
no name in the street.

18:18 He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chase out of
th world.

18:19 He shall neither have son nor nephew among hi people, nor any
remain in hi dwellings.

18:20 they that come after him shall be astoni at hi day, as they
that went befor were affrighted.

18:21 sure such are the dwell of the wicked, and thi is the
plac of him that knoweth not god.

19:1 then job answer and said, 19:2 how long will ye vex my soul,
and break me in piec with words?  19:3 these ten time have ye
reproach me: ye are not asham that ye make yourselv strang to
me.

19:4 and be it inde that I have erred, mine error remaineth with
myself.

19:5 If inde ye will magnifi yourselv against me, and plead
against me my reproach: 19:6 know now that god hath overthrown me, and
hath compass me with hi net.

19:7 behold, I cri out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cri aloud, but
ther is no judgment.

19:8 He hath fenc up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set
dark in my paths.

19:9 He hath strip me of my glory, and taken the crown from my
head.

19:10 He hath destroy me on everi side, and I am gone: and mine hope
hath he remov like a tree.

19:11 He hath also kindl hi wrath against me, and he counteth me
unto him as one of hi enemies.

19:12 hi troop come together, and rais up their way against me, and
encamp round about my tabernacle.

19:13 He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaint are
verili estrang from me.

19:14 My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friend have forgotten
me.

19:15 they that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a
stranger: I am an alien in their sight.

19:16 I call my servant, and he gave me no answer; I intreat him
with my mouth.

19:17 My breath is strang to my wife, though I intreat for the
children' sake of mine own body.

19:18 yea, young children despis me; I arose, and they spake against
me.

19:19 all my inward friend abhor me: and they whom I love are
turn against me.

19:20 My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped
with the skin of my teeth.

19:21 have piti upon me, have piti upon me, O ye my friends; for the
hand of god hath touch me.

19:22 whi do ye persecut me as god, and are not satisfi with my
flesh?  19:23 Oh that my word were now written! oh that they were
print in a book!  19:24 that they were graven with an iron pen and
lead in the rock for ever!  19:25 for I know that my redeem liveth,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: 19:26 and
though after my skin worm destroy thi body, yet in my flesh shall i
se god: 19:27 whom I shall see for myself, and mine eye shall
behold, and not another; though my rein be consum within me.

19:28 but ye should say, whi persecut we him, see the root of the
matt is found in me?  19:29 Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath
bringeth the punish of the sword, that ye may know there is a
judgment.

20:1 then answer zophar the naamathite, and said, 20:2 therefor do
mi thought caus me to answer, and for thi I make haste.

20:3 I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my
understand causeth me to answer.

20:4 knowest thou not thi of old, sinc man wa place upon earth,
20:5 that the triumph of the wick is short, and the joy of the
hypocrit but for a moment?  20:6 though hi excel mount up to
th heavens, and hi head reach unto the clouds; 20:7 yet he shall
perish for ever like hi own dung: they which have seen him shall say,
wher is he?  20:8 He shall fli away as a dream, and shall not be
found: yea, he shall be chase away as a vision of the night.

20:9 the eye also which saw him shall see him no more; neither shall
hi place ani more behold him.

20:10 hi children shall seek to pleas the poor, and hi hand shall
restor their goods.

20:11 hi bone are full of the sin of hi youth, which shall lie down
with him in the dust.

20:12 though wicked be sweet in hi mouth, though he hide it under
hi tongue; 20:13 though he spare it, and forsak it not; but keep it
stil within hi mouth: 20:14 yet hi meat in hi bowel is turned, it
i the gall of asp within him.

20:15 He hath swallow down riches, and he shall vomit them up again:
god shall cast them out of hi belly.

20:16 He shall suck the poison of asps: the viper' tongu shall slay
him.

20:17 He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brook of honey and
butter.

20:18 that which he labour for shall he restore, and shall not
swallow it down: accord to hi substanc shall the restitut be,
and he shall not rejoic therein.

20:19 becaus he hath oppress and hath forsaken the poor; becaus he
hath violent taken away an hous which he build not; 20:20 surely
h shall not feel quiet in hi belly, he shall not save of that
which he desired.

20:21 there shall none of hi meat be left; therefor shall no man
look for hi goods.

20:22 In the ful of hi suffici he shall be in straits: every
hand of the wick shall come upon him.

20:23 when he is about to fill hi belly, god shall cast the furi of
hi wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating.

20:24 He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
strik him through.

20:25 It is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the glittering
sword cometh out of hi gall: terror are upon him.

20:26 all dark shall be hid in hi secret places: a fire not blown
shal consum him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his
tabernacle.

20:27 the heaven shall reveal hi iniquity; and the earth shall rise
up against him.

20:28 the increas of hi hous shall depart, and hi good shall flow
away in the day of hi wrath.

20:29 thi is the portion of a wick man from god, and the heritage
appoint unto him by god.

21:1 but job answer and said, 21:2 hear dilig my speech, and
let thi be your consolations.

21:3 suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock
on.

21:4 As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, whi should
not my spirit be troubled?  21:5 mark me, and be astonished, and lay
your hand upon your mouth.

21:6 even when I rememb I am afraid, and trembl taketh hold on my
flesh.

21:7 wherefor do the wick live, becom old, yea, are mighti in
power?  21:8 their seed is establish in their sight with them, and
their offspr befor their eyes.

21:9 their hous are safe from fear, neither is the rod of god upon
them.

21:10 their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and
casteth not her calf.

21:11 they send forth their littl one like a flock, and their
children dance.

21:12 they take the timbrel and harp, and rejoic at the sound of the
organ.

21:13 they spend their day in wealth, and in a moment go down to the
grave.

21:14 therefor they say unto god, depart from us; for we desir not
th knowledg of thi ways.

21:15 what is the almighty, that we should serv him? and what profit
should we have, if we pray unto him?  21:16 lo, their good is not in
their hand: the counsel of the wick is far from me.

21:17 how oft is the candl of the wick put out! and how oft cometh
their destruct upon them! god distributeth sorrow in hi anger.

21:18 they are as stubbl befor the wind, and as chaff that the storm
carrieth away.

21:19 god layeth up hi iniqu for hi children: he rewardeth him,
and he shall know it.

21:20 hi eye shall see hi destruction, and he shall drink of the
wrath of the almighty.

21:21 for what pleasur hath he in hi hous after him, when the
numb of hi month is cut off in the midst?  21:22 shall ani teach
god knowledge? see he judgeth those that are high.

21:23 one dieth in hi full strength, be wholli at eas and quiet.

21:24 hi breast are full of milk, and hi bone are moisten with
marrow.

21:25 and anoth dieth in the bitter of hi soul, and never
eateth with pleasure.

21:26 they shall lie down alik in the dust, and the worm shall cover
them.

21:27 behold, I know your thoughts, and the devic which ye
wrong imagin against me.

21:28 for ye say, where is the hous of the prince? and where are the
dwel place of the wicked?  21:29 have ye not ask them that go
bi the way? and do ye not know their tokens, 21:30 that the wick is
reserv to the day of destruction? they shall be brought forth to the
day of wrath.

21:31 who shall declar hi way to hi face? and who shall repay him
what he hath done?  21:32 yet shall he be brought to the grave, and
shal remain in the tomb.

21:33 the clod of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and everi man
shal draw after him, as there are innumer befor him.

21:34 how then comfort ye me in vain, see in your answer there
remaineth falsehood?  22:1 then eliphaz the temanit answer and
said, 22:2 can a man be profit unto god, as he that is wise may be
profit unto himself?  22:3 Is it ani pleasur to the almighty,
that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy
way perfect?  22:4 will he reprov thee for fear of thee? will he
ent with thee into judgment?  22:5 Is not thi wicked great? and
thin iniqu infinite?  22:6 for thou hast taken a pledg from thy
broth for nought, and strip the nake of their clothing.

22:7 thou hast not given water to the weari to drink, and thou hast
withholden bread from the hungry.

22:8 but as for the mighti man, he had the earth; and the honourable
man dwelt in it.

22:9 thou hast sent widow away empty, and the arm of the fatherless
hav been broken.

22:10 therefor snare are round about thee, and sudden fear troubleth
thee; 22:11 Or darkness, that thou canst not see; and abund of
wat cover thee.

22:12 Is not god in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the
stars, how high they are!  22:13 and thou sayest, how doth god know?
can he judg through the dark cloud?  22:14 thick cloud are a
cov to him, that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of
heaven.

22:15 hast thou mark the old way which wick men have trodden?
22:16 which were cut down out of time, whose foundat wa overflown
with a flood: 22:17 which said unto god, depart from us: and what can
th almighti do for them?  22:18 yet he fill their hous with good
things: but the counsel of the wick is far from me.

22:19 the righteou see it, and are glad: and the innoc laugh them
to scorn.

22:20 wherea our substanc is not cut down, but the remnant of them
th fire consumeth.

22:21 acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: therebi good
shal come unto thee.

22:22 receive, I pray thee, the law from hi mouth, and lay up his
word in thine heart.

22:23 If thou return to the almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou
shalt put away iniqu far from thi tabernacles.

22:24 then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of ophir as
th stone of the brooks.

22:25 yea, the almighti shall be thi defence, and thou shalt have
plenti of silver.

22:26 for then shalt thou have thi delight in the almighty, and shalt
lift up thi face unto god.

22:27 thou shalt make thi prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
thou shalt pay thi vows.

22:28 thou shalt also decre a thing, and it shall be establish unto
thee: and the light shall shine upon thi ways.

22:29 when men are cast down, then thou shalt say, there is lifting
up; and he shall save the humbl person.

22:30 He shall deliv the island of the innocent: and it is delivered
bi the pure of thine hands.

23:1 then job answer and said, 23:2 even to day is my complaint
bitter: my stroke is heavier than my groaning.

23:3 Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to
hi seat!  23:4 I would order my caus befor him, and fill my mouth
with arguments.

23:5 I would know the word which he would answer me, and understand
what he would say unto me.

23:6 will he plead against me with hi great power? no; but he would
put strength in me.

23:7 there the righteou might disput with him; so should I be
deliv for ever from my judge.

23:8 behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but i
cannot perceiv him: 23:9 On the left hand, where he doth work, but i
cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot
se him: 23:10 but he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried
me, I shall come forth as gold.

23:11 My foot hath held hi steps, hi way have I kept, and not
declined.

23:12 neither have I gone back from the command of hi lips; i
hav esteem the word of hi mouth more than my necessari food.

23:13 but he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what hi soul
desireth, even that he doeth.

23:14 for he performeth the thing that is appoint for me: and many
such thing are with him.

23:15 therefor am I troubl at hi presence: when I consider, I am
afraid of him.

23:16 for god maketh my heart soft, and the almighti troubleth me:
23:17 becaus I wa not cut off befor the darkness, neither hath he
cov the dark from my face.

24:1 why, see time are not hidden from the almighty, do they that
know him not see hi days?  24:2 some remov the landmarks; they
viol take away flocks, and feed thereof.

24:3 they drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow's
ox for a pledge.

24:4 they turn the needi out of the way: the poor of the earth hide
themselv together.

24:5 behold, as wild ass in the desert, go they forth to their work;
ris betim for a prey: the wilder yieldeth food for them and
for their children.

24:6 they reap everi one hi corn in the field: and they gather the
vintag of the wicked.

24:7 they caus the nake to lodg without clothing, that they have no
cov in the cold.

24:8 they are wet with the shower of the mountains, and embrac the
rock for want of a shelter.

24:9 they pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledg of
th poor.

24:10 they caus him to go nake without clothing, and they take away
th sheaf from the hungry; 24:11 which make oil within their walls,
and tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst.

24:12 men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded
crieth out: yet god layeth not folli to them.

24:13 they are of those that rebel against the light; they know not
th way thereof, nor abid in the path thereof.

24:14 the murder rise with the light killeth the poor and needy,
and in the night is as a thief.

24:15 the eye also of the adulter waiteth for the twilight, saying,
no eye shall see me: and disguiseth hi face.

24:16 In the dark they dig through houses, which they had mark for
themselv in the daytime: they know not the light.

24:17 for the morn is to them even as the shadow of death: if one
know them, they are in the terror of the shadow of death.

24:18 He is swift as the waters; their portion is curs in the earth:
h beholdeth not the way of the vineyards.

24:19 drought and heat consum the snow waters: so doth the grave
thos which have sinned.

24:20 the womb shall forget him; the worm shall feed sweetli on him;
h shall be no more remembered; and wicked shall be broken as a
tree.

24:21 He evil entreateth the barren that beareth not: and doeth not
good to the widow.

24:22 He draweth also the mighti with hi power: he riseth up, and no
man is sure of life.

24:23 though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he resteth; yet
hi eye are upon their ways.

24:24 they are exalt for a littl while, but are gone and brought
low; they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the
top of the ear of corn.

24:25 and if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my
speech noth worth?  25:1 then answer bildad the shuhite, and
said, 25:2 dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peac in hi high
places.

25:3 Is there ani number of hi armies? and upon whom doth not his
light arise?  25:4 how then can man be justifi with god? or how can
h be clean that is born of a woman?  25:5 behold even to the moon,
and it shineth not; yea, the star are not pure in hi sight.

25:6 how much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a
worm?  26:1 but job answer and said, 26:2 how hast thou help him
that is without power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength?
26:3 how hast thou counsel him that hath no wisdom? and how hast
thou plenti declar the thing as it is?  26:4 To whom hast thou
utt words? and whose spirit came from thee?  26:5 dead thing are
form from under the waters, and the inhabit thereof.

26:6 hell is nake befor him, and destruct hath no covering.

26:7 He stretcheth out the north over the empti place, and hangeth the
earth upon nothing.

26:8 He bindeth up the water in hi thick clouds; and the cloud is
not rent under them.

26:9 He holdeth back the face of hi throne, and spreadeth hi cloud
upon it.

26:10 He hath compass the water with bounds, until the day and
night come to an end.

26:11 the pillar of heaven trembl and are astonish at hi reproof.

26:12 He divideth the sea with hi power, and by hi understand he
smiteth through the proud.

26:13 By hi spirit he hath garnish the heavens; hi hand hath
form the crook serpent.

26:14 lo, these are part of hi ways: but how littl a portion is
heard of him? but the thunder of hi power who can understand?  27:1
moreov job continu hi parable, and said, 27:2 As god liveth, who
hath taken away my judgment; and the almighty, who hath vex my soul;
27:3 all the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of god is in my
nostrils; 27:4 My lip shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongu utter
deceit.

27:5 god forbid that I should justifi you: till I die I will not
remov mine integr from me.

27:6 My righteous I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart
shal not reproach me so long as I live.

27:7 let mine enemi be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me
a the unrighteous.

27:8 for what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained,
when god taketh away hi soul?  27:9 will god hear hi cri when
troubl cometh upon him?  27:10 will he delight himself in the
almighty? will he alway call upon god?  27:11 I will teach you by the
hand of god: that which is with the almighti will I not conceal.

27:12 behold, all ye yourselv have seen it; whi then are ye thus
altogeth vain?  27:13 thi is the portion of a wick man with god,
and the heritag of oppressors, which they shall receiv of the
almighty.

27:14 If hi children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his
offspr shall not be satisfi with bread.

27:15 those that remain of him shall be buri in death: and his
widow shall not weep.

27:16 though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepar raiment as the
clay; 27:17 He may prepar it, but the just shall put it on, and the
innoc shall divid the silver.

27:18 He buildeth hi hous as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper
maketh.

27:19 the rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he
openeth hi eyes, and he is not.

27:20 terror take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away
in the night.

27:21 the east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a
storm hurleth him out of hi place.

27:22 for god shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee
out of hi hand.

27:23 men shall clap their hand at him, and shall hiss him out of his
place.

28:1 sure there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where
they fine it.

28:2 iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the
stone.

28:3 He setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfection:
th stone of darkness, and the shadow of death.

28:4 the flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; even the waters
forgotten of the foot: they are dri up, they are gone away from men.

28:5 As for the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is turned
up as it were fire.

28:6 the stone of it are the place of sapphires: and it hath dust of
gold.

28:7 there is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture's
ey hath not seen: 28:8 the lion' whelp have not trodden it, nor the
fierc lion pass by it.

28:9 He putteth forth hi hand upon the rock; he overturneth the
mountain by the roots.

28:10 He cutteth out river among the rocks; and hi eye seeth every
preci thing.

28:11 He bindeth the flood from overflowing; and the thing that is
hid bringeth he forth to light.

28:12 but where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of
understanding?  28:13 man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it
found in the land of the living.

28:14 the depth saith, It is not in me: and the sea saith, It is not
with me.

28:15 It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed
for the price thereof.

28:16 It cannot be valu with the gold of ophir, with the precious
onyx, or the sapphire.

28:17 the gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchang of it
shal not be for jewel of fine gold.

28:18 No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price
of wisdom is abov rubies.

28:19 the topaz of ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be
valu with pure gold.

28:20 whenc then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of
understanding?  28:21 see it is hid from the eye of all living,
and kept close from the fowl of the air.

28:22 destruct and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with
our ears.

28:23 god understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place
thereof.

28:24 for he looketh to the end of the earth, and seeth under the
whol heaven; 28:25 To make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth
th water by measure.

28:26 when he made a decre for the rain, and a way for the lightning
of the thunder: 28:27 then did he see it, and declar it; he prepared
it, yea, and search it out.

28:28 and unto man he said, behold, the fear of the lord, that is
wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.

29:1 moreov job continu hi parable, and said, 29:2 Oh that I were
a in month past, as in the day when god preserv me; 29:3 when his
candl shine upon my head, and when by hi light I walk through
darkness; 29:4 As I wa in the day of my youth, when the secret of
god wa upon my tabernacle; 29:5 when the almighti wa yet with me,
when my children were about me; 29:6 when I wash my step with
butter, and the rock pour me out river of oil; 29:7 when I went out
to the gate through the city, when I prepar my seat in the street!
29:8 the young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the age arose, and
stood up.

29:9 the princ refrain talking, and laid their hand on their
mouth.

29:10 the nobl held their peace, and their tongu cleav to the
roof of their mouth.

29:11 when the ear heard me, then it bless me; and when the eye saw
me, it gave wit to me: 29:12 becaus I deliv the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him.

29:13 the bless of him that wa readi to perish came upon me: and i
caus the widow' heart to sing for joy.

29:14 I put on righteousness, and it cloth me: my judgment wa as a
rob and a diadem.

29:15 I wa eye to the blind, and feet wa I to the lame.

29:16 I wa a father to the poor: and the caus which I knew not i
search out.

29:17 and I brake the jaw of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of
hi teeth.

29:18 then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multipli my
day as the sand.

29:19 My root wa spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night
upon my branch.

29:20 My glori wa fresh in me, and my bow wa renew in my hand.

29:21 unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silenc at my
counsel.

29:22 after my word they spake not again; and my speech drop upon
them.

29:23 and they wait for me as for the rain; and they open their
mouth wide as for the latter rain.

29:24 If I laugh on them, they believ it not; and the light of my
counten they cast not down.

29:25 I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the
army, as one that comforteth the mourners.

30:1 but now they that are younger than I have me in derision, whose
fath I would have disdain to have set with the dog of my flock.

30:2 yea, whereto might the strength of their hand profit me, in whom
old age wa perished?  30:3 for want and famin they were solitary;
fle into the wilder in former time desol and waste.

30:4 who cut up mallow by the bushes, and junip root for their
meat.

30:5 they were driven forth from among men, (they cri after them as
aft a thief;) 30:6 To dwell in the cliff of the valleys, in caves
of the earth, and in the rocks.

30:7 among the bush they brayed; under the nettl they were
gath together.

30:8 they were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were
vil than the earth.

30:9 and now am I their song, yea, I am their byword.

30:10 they abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in
mi face.

30:11 becaus he hath loos my cord, and afflict me, they have also
let loos the bridl befor me.

30:12 upon my right hand rise the youth; they push away my feet, and
they rais up against me the way of their destruction.

30:13 they mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no
helper.

30:14 they came upon me as a wide break in of waters: in the
desol they roll themselv upon me.

30:15 terror are turn upon me: they pursu my soul as the wind: and
mi welfar passeth away as a cloud.

30:16 and now my soul is pour out upon me; the day of affliction
hav taken hold upon me.

30:17 My bone are pierc in me in the night season: and my sinews
tak no rest.

30:18 By the great forc of my diseas is my garment changed: it
bindeth me about as the collar of my coat.

30:19 He hath cast me into the mire, and I am becom like dust and
ashes.

30:20 I cri unto thee, and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou
regardest me not.

30:21 thou art becom cruel to me: with thi strong hand thou opposest
thyself against me.

30:22 thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride upon it,
and dissolvest my substance.

30:23 for I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house
appoint for all living.

30:24 howbeit he will not stretch out hi hand to the grave, though
they cri in hi destruction.

30:25 did not I weep for him that wa in trouble? wa not my soul
griev for the poor?  30:26 when I look for good, then evil came
unto me: and when I wait for light, there came darkness.

30:27 My bowel boiled, and rest not: the day of affliction
prev me.

30:28 I went mourn without the sun: I stood up, and I cri in the
congregation.

30:29 I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls.

30:30 My skin is black upon me, and my bone are burn with heat.

30:31 My harp also is turn to mourning, and my organ into the voice
of them that weep.

31:1 I made a coven with mine eyes; whi then should I think upon a
maid?  31:2 for what portion of god is there from above? and what
inherit of the almighti from on high?  31:3 Is not destruct to
th wicked? and a strang punish to the worker of iniquity?  31:4
doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps?  31:5 If I have
walk with vanity, or if my foot hath hast to deceit; 31:6 let me
b weigh in an even balanc that god may know mine integrity.

31:7 If my step hath turn out of the way, and mine heart walked
aft mine eyes, and if ani blot hath cleav to mine hands; 31:8 then
let me sow, and let anoth eat; yea, let my offspr be root out.

31:9 If mine heart have been deceiv by a woman, or if I have laid
wait at my neighbour' door; 31:10 then let my wife grind unto
another, and let other bow down upon her.

31:11 for thi is an heinou crime; yea, it is an iniqu to be
punish by the judges.

31:12 for it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would root
out all mine increase.

31:13 If I did despis the caus of my manserv or of my
maidservant, when they contend with me; 31:14 what then shall I do
when god riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?
31:15 did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb?  31:16 If I have withheld the poor from their
desire, or have caus the eye of the widow to fail; 31:17 Or have
eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten
thereof; 31:18 (for from my youth he wa brought up with me, as with a
father, and I have guid her from my mother' womb;) 31:19 If I have
seen ani perish for want of clothing, or ani poor without covering;
31:20 If hi loin have not bless me, and if he were not warm with
th fleec of my sheep; 31:21 If I have lift up my hand against the
fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate: 31:22 then let mine arm
fal from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

31:23 for destruct from god wa a terror to me, and by reason of
hi high I could not endure.

31:24 If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, thou
art my confidence; 31:25 If I rejoic becaus my wealth wa great, and
becaus mine hand had gotten much; 31:26 If I beheld the sun when it
shined, or the moon walk in brightness; 31:27 and my heart hath
been secretli enticed, or my mouth hath kiss my hand: 31:28 this
also were an iniqu to be punish by the judge: for I should have
deni the god that is above.

31:29 If I rejoic at the destruct of him that hate me, or lifted
up myself when evil found him: 31:30 neither have I suffer my mouth
to sin by wish a curs to hi soul.

31:31 If the men of my tabernacl said not, Oh that we had of his
flesh!  we cannot be satisfied.

31:32 the stranger did not lodg in the street: but I open my doors
to the traveller.

31:33 If I cover my transgress as adam, by hide mine iniquity
in my bosom: 31:34 did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt
of famili terrifi me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the
door?  31:35 Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desir is, that the
almighti would answer me, and that mine adversari had written a book.

31:36 sure I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown
to me.

31:37 I would declar unto him the number of my steps; as a prince
would I go near unto him.

31:38 If my land cri against me, or that the furrow likewis thereof
complain; 31:39 If I have eaten the fruit thereof without money, or
hav caus the owner thereof to lose their life: 31:40 let thistles
grow instead of wheat, and cockl instead of barley.

th word of job are ended.

32:1 So these three men ceas to answer job, becaus he wa righteous
in hi own eyes.

32:2 then wa kindl the wrath of elihu the son of barachel the
buzite, of the kindr of ram: against job wa hi wrath kindled,
becaus he justifi himself rather than god.

32:3 also against hi three friend wa hi wrath kindled, because
they had found no answer, and yet had condemn job.

32:4 now elihu had wait till job had spoken, becaus they were elder
than he.

32:5 when elihu saw that there wa no answer in the mouth of these
thre men, then hi wrath wa kindled.

32:6 and elihu the son of barachel the buzit answer and said, I am
young, and ye are veri old; wherefor I wa afraid, and durst not shew
you mine opinion.

32:7 I said, day should speak, and multitud of year should teach
wisdom.

32:8 but there is a spirit in man: and the inspir of the almighty
giveth them understanding.

32:9 great men are not alway wise: neither do the age understand
judgment.

32:10 therefor I said, hearken to me; I also will shew mine opinion.

32:11 behold, I wait for your words; I gave ear to your reasons,
whilst ye search out what to say.

32:12 yea, I attend unto you, and, behold, there wa none of you
that convinc job, or that answer hi words: 32:13 lest ye should
say, We have found out wisdom: god thrusteth him down, not man.

32:14 now he hath not direct hi word against me: neither will i
answ him with your speeches.

32:15 they were amazed, they answer no more: they left off speaking.

32:16 when I had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, and
answ no more;) 32:17 I said, I will answer also my part, I also
wil shew mine opinion.

32:18 for I am full of matter, the spirit within me constraineth me.

32:19 behold, my belli is as wine which hath no vent; it is readi to
burst like new bottles.

32:20 I will speak, that I may be refreshed: I will open my lip and
answer.

32:21 let me not, I pray you, accept ani man' person, neither let me
giv flatter titl unto man.

32:22 for I know not to give flatter titles; in so do my maker
would soon take me away.

33:1 wherefore, job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all
mi words.

33:2 behold, now I have open my mouth, my tongu hath spoken in my
mouth.

33:3 My word shall be of the upright of my heart: and my lips
shal utter knowledg clearly.

33:4 the spirit of god hath made me, and the breath of the almighty
hath given me life.

33:5 If thou canst answer me, set thi word in order befor me, stand
up.

33:6 behold, I am accord to thi wish in god' stead: I also am
form out of the clay.

33:7 behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my
hand be heavi upon thee.

33:8 sure thou hast spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the
voic of thi words, saying, 33:9 I am clean without transgression, i
am innocent; neither is there iniqu in me.

33:10 behold, he findeth occas against me, he counteth me for his
enemy, 33:11 He putteth my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my
paths.

33:12 behold, in thi thou art not just: I will answer thee, that god
i greater than man.

33:13 whi dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of
ani of hi matters.

33:14 for god speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not.

33:15 In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth
upon men, in slumber upon the bed; 33:16 then he openeth the ears
of men, and sealeth their instruction, 33:17 that he may withdraw man
from hi purpose, and hide pride from man.

33:18 He keepeth back hi soul from the pit, and hi life from
perish by the sword.

33:19 He is chasten also with pain upon hi bed, and the multitude
of hi bone with strong pain: 33:20 So that hi life abhorreth bread,
and hi soul dainti meat.

33:21 hi flesh is consum away, that it cannot be seen; and his
bon that were not seen stick out.

33:22 yea, hi soul draweth near unto the grave, and hi life to the
destroyers.

33:23 If there be a messeng with him, an interpreter, one among a
thousand, to shew unto man hi uprightness: 33:24 then he is gracious
unto him, and saith, deliv him from go down to the pit: I have
found a ransom.

33:25 hi flesh shall be fresher than a child's: he shall return to
th day of hi youth: 33:26 He shall pray unto god, and he will be
favour unto him: and he shall see hi face with joy: for he will
rend unto man hi righteousness.

33:27 He looketh upon men, and if ani say, I have sinned, and
pervert that which wa right, and it profit me not; 33:28 He will
deliv hi soul from go into the pit, and hi life shall see the
light.

33:29 lo, all these thing worketh god oftentim with man, 33:30 to
br back hi soul from the pit, to be enlighten with the light of
th living.

33:31 mark well, O job, hearken unto me: hold thi peace, and I will
speak.

33:32 If thou hast anyth to say, answer me: speak, for I desir to
justifi thee.

33:33 If not, hearken unto me: hold thi peace, and I shall teach thee
wisdom.

34:1 furthermor elihu answer and said, 34:2 hear my words, O ye
wis men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.

34:3 for the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat.

34:4 let us choos to us judgment: let us know among ourselv what is
good.

34:5 for job hath said, I am righteous: and god hath taken away my
judgment.

34:6 should I lie against my right? my wound is incur without
transgression.

34:7 what man is like job, who drinketh up scorn like water?  34:8
which goeth in compani with the worker of iniquity, and walketh with
wick men.

34:9 for he hath said, It profiteth a man noth that he should
delight himself with god.

34:10 therefor hearken unto me ye men of understanding: far be it
from god, that he should do wickedness; and from the almighty, that he
should commit iniquity.

34:11 for the work of a man shall he render unto him, and caus every
man to find accord to hi ways.

34:12 yea, sure god will not do wickedly, neither will the almighty
pervert judgment.

34:13 who hath given him a charg over the earth? or who hath disposed
th whole world?  34:14 If he set hi heart upon man, if he gather
unto himself hi spirit and hi breath; 34:15 all flesh shall perish
together, and man shall turn again unto dust.

34:16 If now thou hast understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice
of my words.

34:17 shall even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn
him that is most just?  34:18 Is it fit to say to a king, thou art
wicked? and to princes, Ye are ungodly?  34:19 how much less to him
that accepteth not the person of princes, nor regardeth the rich more
than the poor? for they all are the work of hi hands.

34:20 In a moment shall they die, and the peopl shall be troubl at
midnight, and pass away: and the mighti shall be taken away without
hand.

34:21 for hi eye are upon the way of man, and he seeth all his
goings.

34:22 there is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the worker of
iniqu may hide themselves.

34:23 for he will not lay upon man more than right; that he should
ent into judgment with god.

34:24 He shall break in piec mighti men without number, and set
oth in their stead.

34:25 therefor he knoweth their works, and he overturneth them in the
night, so that they are destroyed.

34:26 He striketh them as wick men in the open sight of others;
34:27 becaus they turn back from him, and would not consid ani of
hi ways: 34:28 So that they caus the cri of the poor to come unto
him, and he heareth the cri of the afflicted.

34:29 when he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he
hideth hi face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a
nation, or against a man only: 34:30 that the hypocrit reign not,
lest the peopl be ensnared.

34:31 sure it is meet to be said unto god, I have borne
chastisement, I will not offend ani more: 34:32 that which I see not
teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

34:33 should it be accord to thi mind? he will recompens it,
wheth thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not I: therefore
speak what thou knowest.

34:34 let men of understand tell me, and let a wise man hearken
unto me.

34:35 job hath spoken without knowledge, and hi word were without
wisdom.

34:36 My desir is that job may be tri unto the end becaus of his
answ for wick men.

34:37 for he addeth rebellion unto hi sin, he clappeth hi hands
among us, and multiplieth hi word against god.

35:1 elihu spake moreover, and said, 35:2 thinkest thou thi to be
right, that thou saidst, My righteous is more than god's?  35:3
for thou saidst, what advantag will it be unto thee? and, what profit
shal I have, if I be cleans from my sin?  35:4 I will answer thee,
and thi companion with thee.

35:5 look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the cloud which are
high than thou.

35:6 If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or if thy
transgress be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?  35:7 If thou
b righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of thine
hand?  35:8 thi wicked may hurt a man as thou art; and thy
right may profit the son of man.

35:9 By reason of the multitud of oppress they make the oppressed
to cry: they cri out by reason of the arm of the mighty.

35:10 but none saith, where is god my maker, who giveth song in the
night; 35:11 who teacheth us more than the beast of the earth, and
maketh us wiser than the fowl of heaven?  35:12 there they cry, but
non giveth answer, becaus of the pride of evil men.

35:13 sure god will not hear vanity, neither will the almighty
regard it.

35:14 although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment is
befor him; therefor trust thou in him.

35:15 but now, becaus it is not so, he hath visit in hi anger; yet
h knoweth it not in great extremity: 35:16 therefor doth job open
hi mouth in vain; he multiplieth word without knowledge.

36:1 elihu also proceeded, and said, 36:2 suffer me a little, and i
wil shew thee that I have yet to speak on god' behalf.

36:3 I will fetch my knowledg from afar, and will ascribe
right to my maker.

36:4 for truli my word shall not be false: he that is perfect in
knowledg is with thee.

36:5 behold, god is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighti in
strength and wisdom.

36:6 He preserveth not the life of the wicked: but giveth right to the
poor.

36:7 He withdraweth not hi eye from the righteous: but with kings
ar they on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they
ar exalted.

36:8 and if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cord of
affliction; 36:9 then he sheweth them their work, and their
transgress that they have exceeded.

36:10 He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that
they return from iniquity.

36:11 If they obey and serv him, they shall spend their day in
prosperity, and their year in pleasures.

36:12 but if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they
shal die without knowledge.

36:13 but the hypocrit in heart heap up wrath: they cri not when he
bindeth them.

36:14 they die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.

36:15 He delivereth the poor in hi affliction, and openeth their ears
in oppression.

36:16 even so would he have remov thee out of the strait into a
broad place, where there is no straitness; and that which should be
set on thi tabl should be full of fatness.

36:17 but thou hast fulfil the judgment of the wicked: judgment and
justic take hold on thee.

36:18 becaus there is wrath, bewar lest he take thee away with his
stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliv thee.

36:19 will he esteem thi riches? no, not gold, nor all the forc of
strength.

36:20 desir not the night, when peopl are cut off in their place.

36:21 take heed, regard not iniquity: for thi hast thou chosen rather
than affliction.

36:22 behold, god exalteth by hi power: who teacheth like him?  36:23
who hath enjoin him hi way? or who can say, thou hast wrought
iniquity?  36:24 rememb that thou magnifi hi work, which men
behold.

36:25 everi man may see it; man may behold it afar off.

36:26 behold, god is great, and we know him not, neither can the
numb of hi year be search out.

36:27 for he maketh small the drop of water: they pour down rain
accord to the vapour thereof: 36:28 which the cloud do drop and
distil upon man abundantly.

36:29 also can ani understand the spread of the clouds, or the
nois of hi tabernacle?  36:30 behold, he spreadeth hi light upon
it, and covereth the bottom of the sea.

36:31 for by them judgeth he the people; he giveth meat in abundance.

36:32 with cloud he covereth the light; and commandeth it not to
shin by the cloud that cometh betwixt.

36:33 the nois thereof sheweth concern it, the cattl also
concern the vapour.

37:1 At thi also my heart trembleth, and is move out of hi place.

37:2 hear attent the nois of hi voice, and the sound that goeth
out of hi mouth.

37:3 He directeth it under the whole heaven, and hi lightn unto
th end of the earth.

37:4 after it a voic roareth: he thundereth with the voic of his
excellency; and he will not stay them when hi voic is heard.

37:5 god thundereth marvel with hi voice; great thing doeth
he, which we cannot comprehend.

37:6 for he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth; likewis to the
smal rain, and to the great rain of hi strength.

37:7 He sealeth up the hand of everi man; that all men may know his
work.

37:8 then the beast go into dens, and remain in their places.

37:9 out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the north.

37:10 By the breath of god frost is given: and the breadth of the
wat is straitened.

37:11 also by water he wearieth the thick cloud: he scattereth his
bright cloud: 37:12 and it is turn round about by hi counsels: that
they may do whatsoev he commandeth them upon the face of the world
in the earth.

37:13 He causeth it to come, whether for correction, or for hi land,
or for mercy.

37:14 hearken unto this, O job: stand still, and consid the wondrous
work of god.

37:15 dost thou know when god dispos them, and caus the light of
hi cloud to shine?  37:16 dost thou know the balanc of the
clouds, the wondrou work of him which is perfect in knowledge?
37:17 how thi garment are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the
south wind?  37:18 hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is
strong, and as a molten look glass?  37:19 teach us what we shall
say unto him; for we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.

37:20 shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, sure he
shal be swallow up.

37:21 and now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but
th wind passeth, and cleanseth them.

37:22 fair weather cometh out of the north: with god is terrible
majesty.

37:23 touch the almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent
in power, and in judgment, and in plenti of justice: he will not
afflict.

37:24 men do therefor fear him: he respecteth not ani that are wise
of heart.

38:1 then the lord answer job out of the whirlwind, and said, 38:2
who is thi that darkeneth counsel by word without knowledge?  38:3
gird up now thi loin like a man; for I will demand of thee, and
answ thou me.

38:4 where wast thou when I laid the foundat of the earth?
declare, if thou hast understanding.

38:5 who hath laid the measur thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath
stretch the line upon it?  38:6 whereupon are the foundations
thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; 38:7 when the
morn star sang together, and all the son of god shout for joy?
38:8 Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it
had issu out of the womb?  38:9 when I made the cloud the garment
thereof, and thick dark a swaddlingband for it, 38:10 and brake up
for it my decre place, and set bar and doors, 38:11 and said,
hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall thi proud
wav be stayed?  38:12 hast thou command the morn sinc thy
days; and caus the dayspr to know hi place; 38:13 that it might
tak hold of the end of the earth, that the wick might be shaken
out of it?  38:14 It is turn as clay to the seal; and they stand as
a garment.

38:15 and from the wick their light is withholden, and the high arm
shal be broken.

38:16 hast thou enter into the spring of the sea? or hast thou
walk in the search of the depth?  38:17 have the gate of death been
open unto thee? or hast thou seen the door of the shadow of death?
38:18 hast thou perceiv the breadth of the earth? declar if thou
knowest it all.

38:19 where is the way where light dwelleth? and as for darkness,
wher is the place thereof, 38:20 that thou shouldest take it to the
bound thereof, and that thou shouldest know the path to the house
thereof?  38:21 knowest thou it, becaus thou wast then born? or
becaus the number of thi day is great?  38:22 hast thou enter into
th treasur of the snow? or hast thou seen the treasur of the
hail, 38:23 which I have reserv against the time of trouble, against
th day of battl and war?  38:24 By what way is the light parted,
which scattereth the east wind upon the earth?  38:25 who hath divided
a watercours for the overflow of waters, or a way for the
lightn of thunder; 38:26 To caus it to rain on the earth, where no
man is; on the wilderness, wherein there is no man; 38:27 To satisfy
th desol and wast ground; and to caus the bud of the tender herb
to spring forth?  38:28 hath the rain a father? or who hath begotten
th drop of dew?  38:29 out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary
frost of heaven, who hath gender it?  38:30 the water are hid as
with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.

38:31 canst thou bind the sweet influenc of pleiades, or loos the
band of orion?  38:32 canst thou bring forth mazzaroth in hi season?
or canst thou guid arcturu with hi sons?  38:33 knowest thou the
ordin of heaven? canst thou set the dominion thereof in the
earth?  38:34 canst thou lift up thi voic to the clouds, that
abund of water may cover thee?  38:35 canst thou send lightnings,
that they may go and say unto thee, here we are?  38:36 who hath put
wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understand to the
heart?  38:37 who can number the cloud in wisdom? or who can stay the
bottl of heaven, 38:38 when the dust groweth into hardness, and the
clod cleav fast together?  38:39 wilt thou hunt the prey for the
lion? or fill the appetit of the young lions, 38:40 when they couch
in their dens, and abid in the covert to lie in wait?  38:41 who
provideth for the raven hi food? when hi young one cri unto god,
they wander for lack of meat.

39:1 knowest thou the time when the wild goat of the rock bring
forth? or canst thou mark when the hind do calve?  39:2 canst thou
numb the month that they fulfil? or knowest thou the time when they
br forth?  39:3 they bow themselves, they bring forth their young
ones, they cast out their sorrows.

39:4 their young one are in good liking, they grow up with corn; they
go forth, and return not unto them.

39:5 who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who hath loos the bands
of the wild ass?  39:6 whose hous I have made the wilderness, and the
barren land hi dwellings.

39:7 He scorneth the multitud of the city, neither regardeth he the
cri of the driver.

39:8 the rang of the mountain is hi pasture, and he searcheth after
everi green thing.

39:9 will the unicorn be will to serv thee, or abid by thi crib?
39:10 canst thou bind the unicorn with hi band in the furrow? or will
h harrow the valley after thee?  39:11 wilt thou trust him, because
hi strength is great? or wilt thou leav thi labour to him?  39:12
wilt thou believ him, that he will bring home thi seed, and gather it
into thi barn?  39:13 gavest thou the goodli wing unto the peacocks?
or wing and feather unto the ostrich?  39:14 which leaveth her eggs
in the earth, and warmeth them in dust, 39:15 and forgetteth that the
foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them.

39:16 she is harden against her young ones, as though they were not
her's: her labour is in vain without fear; 39:17 becaus god hath
depriv her of wisdom, neither hath he impart to her understanding.

39:18 what time she lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse
and hi rider.

39:19 hast thou given the hors strength? hast thou cloth hi neck
with thunder?  39:20 canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the
glori of hi nostril is terrible.

39:21 He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in hi strength: he goeth
on to meet the arm men.

39:22 He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he
back from the sword.

39:23 the quiver rattleth against him, the glitter spear and the
shield.

39:24 He swalloweth the ground with fierc and rage: neither
believeth he that it is the sound of the trumpet.

39:25 He saith among the trumpets, ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle
afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.

39:26 doth the hawk fli by thi wisdom, and stretch her wing toward
th south?  39:27 doth the eagl mount up at thi command, and make her
nest on high?  39:28 she dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the
crag of the rock, and the strong place.

39:29 from thenc she seeketh the prey, and her eye behold afar off.

39:30 her young one also suck up blood: and where the slain are,
ther is she.

40:1 moreov the lord answer job, and said, 40:2 shall he that
contendeth with the almighti instruct him? he that reproveth god, let
him answer it.

40:3 then job answer the lord, and said, 40:4 behold, I am vile;
what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth.

40:5 onc have I spoken; but I will not answer: yea, twice; but I will
proce no further.

40:6 then answer the lord unto job out of the whirlwind, and said,
40:7 gird up thi loin now like a man: I will demand of thee, and
declar thou unto me.

40:8 wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me, that
thou mayest be righteous?  40:9 hast thou an arm like god? or canst
thou thunder with a voic like him?  40:10 deck thyself now with
majesti and excellency; and array thyself with glori and beauty.

40:11 cast abroad the rage of thi wrath: and behold everi one that is
proud, and abas him.

40:12 look on everi one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread
down the wick in their place.

40:13 hide them in the dust together; and bind their face in secret.

40:14 then will I also confess unto thee that thine own right hand can
sav thee.

40:15 behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as
an ox.

40:16 Lo now, hi strength is in hi loins, and hi forc is in the
navel of hi belly.

40:17 He moveth hi tail like a cedar: the sinew of hi stone are
wrap together.

40:18 hi bone are as strong piec of brass; hi bone are like bars
of iron.

40:19 He is the chief of the way of god: he that made him can make
hi sword to approach unto him.

40:20 sure the mountain bring him forth food, where all the beasts
of the field play.

40:21 He lieth under the shadi trees, in the covert of the reed, and
fens.

40:22 the shadi tree cover him with their shadow; the willow of the
brook compass him about.

40:23 behold, he drinketh up a river, and hasteth not: he trusteth
that he can draw up jordan into hi mouth.

40:24 He taketh it with hi eyes: hi nose pierceth through snares.

41:1 canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook? or hi tongu with a
cord which thou lettest down?  41:2 canst thou put an hook into his
nose? or bore hi jaw through with a thorn?  41:3 will he make many
suppl unto thee? will he speak soft word unto thee?  41:4
will he make a coven with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant
for ever?  41:5 wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou
bind him for thi maidens?  41:6 shall the companion make a banquet of
him? shall they part him among the merchants?  41:7 canst thou fill
hi skin with barb irons? or hi head with fish spears?  41:8 lay
thin hand upon him, rememb the battle, do no more.

41:9 behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down
even at the sight of him?  41:10 none is so fierc that dare stir him
up: who then is abl to stand befor me?  41:11 who hath prevent me,
that I should repay him? whatsoev is under the whole heaven is mine.

41:12 I will not conceal hi parts, nor hi power, nor hi comely
proportion.

41:13 who can discov the face of hi garment? or who can come to him
with hi doubl bridle?  41:14 who can open the door of hi face? his
teeth are terribl round about.

41:15 hi scale are hi pride, shut up togeth as with a close seal.

41:16 one is so near to another, that no air can come between them.

41:17 they are join one to another, they stick together, that they
cannot be sundered.

41:18 By hi nees a light doth shine, and hi eye are like the
eyelid of the morning.

41:19 out of hi mouth go burn lamps, and spark of fire leap out.

41:20 out of hi nostril goeth smoke, as out of a seeth pot or
caldron.

41:21 hi breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of hi mouth.

41:22 In hi neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turn into joy
befor him.

41:23 the flake of hi flesh are join together: they are firm in
themselves; they cannot be moved.

41:24 hi heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piec of the
neth millstone.

41:25 when he raiseth up himself, the mighti are afraid: by reason of
break they purifi themselves.

41:26 the sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold: the spear, the
dart, nor the habergeon.

41:27 He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.

41:28 the arrow cannot make him flee: slingston are turn with him
into stubble.

41:29 dart are count as stubble: he laugheth at the shake of a
spear.

41:30 sharp stone are under him: he spreadeth sharp point things
upon the mire.

41:31 He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a
pot of ointment.

41:32 He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to
b hoary.

41:33 upon earth there is not hi like, who is made without fear.

41:34 He beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children
of pride.

42:1 then job answer the lord, and said, 42:2 I know that thou canst
do everi thing, and that no thought can be withholden from thee.

42:3 who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefor have i
utt that I understood not; thing too wonder for me, which i
knew not.

42:4 hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee,
and declar thou unto me.

42:5 I have heard of thee by the hear of the ear: but now mine eye
seeth thee.

42:6 wherefor I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes.

42:7 and it wa so, that after the lord had spoken these word unto
job, the lord said to eliphaz the temanite, My wrath is kindled
against thee, and against thi two friends: for ye have not spoken of
m the thing that is right, as my servant job hath.

42:8 therefor take unto you now seven bullock and seven rams, and go
to my servant job, and offer up for yourselv a burnt offering; and
mi servant job shall pray for you: for him will I accept: lest I deal
with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing
which is right, like my servant job.

42:9 So eliphaz the temanit and bildad the shuhit and zophar the
naamathit went, and did accord as the lord command them: the
lord also accept job.

42:10 and the lord turn the captiv of job, when he pray for his
friends: also the lord gave job twice as much as he had before.

42:11 then came there unto him all hi brethren, and all hi sisters,
and all they that had been of hi acquaint before, and did eat
bread with him in hi house: and they bemoan him, and comfort him
ov all the evil that the lord had brought upon him: everi man also
gav him a piec of money, and everi one an ear of gold.

42:12 So the lord bless the latter end of job more than his
beginning: for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand
camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.

42:13 He had also seven son and three daughters.

42:14 and he call the name of the first, jemima; and the name of the
second, kezia; and the name of the third, kerenhappuch.

42:15 and in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters
of job: and their father gave them inherit among their brethren.

42:16 after thi live job an hundr and forti years, and saw his
sons, and hi sons' sons, even four generations.

42:17 So job died, be old and full of days.




th book of psalms


1:1 bless is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
scornful.

1:2 but hi delight is in the law of the lord; and in hi law doth he
medit day and night.

1:3 and he shall be like a tree plant by the river of water, that
bringeth forth hi fruit in hi season; hi leaf also shall not
wither; and whatsoev he doeth shall prosper.

1:4 the ungodli are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind
driveth away.

1:5 therefor the ungodli shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners
in the congreg of the righteous.

1:6 for the lord knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the
ungodli shall perish.



2:1 whi do the heathen rage, and the peopl imagin a vain thing?

2:2 the king of the earth set themselves, and the ruler take counsel
together, against the lord, and against hi anointed, saying,

2:3 let us break their band asunder, and cast away their cord from
us.

2:4 He that sitteth in the heaven shall laugh: the lord shall have
them in derision.

2:5 then shall he speak unto them in hi wrath, and vex them in his
sor displeasure.

2:6 yet have I set my king upon my holi hill of zion.

2:7 I will declar the decree: the lord hath said unto me, thou art my
son; thi day have I begotten thee.

2:8 ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for thi possession.

2:9 thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in
piec like a potter' vessel.

2:10 Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judg of
th earth.

2:11 serv the lord with fear, and rejoic with trembling.

2:12 kiss the son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when
hi wrath is kindl but a little. bless are all they that put their
trust in him.



3:1 lord, how are they increas that troubl me! mani are they that
ris up against me.

3:2 mani there be which say of my soul, there is no help for him in
god.

selah.

3:3 but thou, O lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up
of mine head.

3:4 I cri unto the lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his
holi hill. selah.

3:5 I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the lord sustain me.

3:6 I will not be afraid of ten thousand of people, that have set
themselv against me round about.

3:7 arise, O lord; save me, O my god: for thou hast smitten all mine
enemi upon the cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the
ungodly.

3:8 salvat belongeth unto the lord: thi bless is upon thy
people.

selah.



4:1 hear me when I call, O god of my righteousness: thou hast enlarged
m when I wa in distress; have merci upon me, and hear my prayer.

4:2 O ye son of men, how long will ye turn my glori into shame? how
long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? selah.

4:3 but know that the lord hath set apart him that is godli for
himself: the lord will hear when I call unto him.

4:4 stand in awe, and sin not: commun with your own heart upon your
bed, and be still. selah.

4:5 offer the sacrific of righteousness, and put your trust in the
lord.

4:6 there be mani that say, who will shew us ani good? lord, lift thou
up the light of thi counten upon us.

4:7 thou hast put glad in my heart, more than in the time that
their corn and their wine increased.

4:8 I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou, lord, only
makest me dwell in safety.



5:1 give ear to my words, O lord, consid my meditation.

5:2 hearken unto the voic of my cry, my king, and my god: for unto
the will I pray.

5:3 My voic shalt thou hear in the morning, O lord; in the morning
wil I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

5:4 for thou art not a god that hath pleasur in wickedness: neither
shal evil dwell with thee.

5:5 the foolish shall not stand in thi sight: thou hatest all workers
of iniquity.

5:6 thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the lord will abhor
th bloodi and deceit man.

5:7 but as for me, I will come into thi hous in the multitud of thy
mercy: and in thi fear will I worship toward thi holi temple.

5:8 lead me, O lord, in thi righteous becaus of mine enemies;
mak thi way straight befor my face.

5:9 for there is no faith in their mouth; their inward part is
veri wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with
their tongue.

5:10 destroy thou them, O god; let them fall by their own counsels;
cast them out in the multitud of their transgressions; for they have
rebel against thee.

5:11 but let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them
ev shout for joy, becaus thou defendest them: let them also that
lov thi name be joy in thee.

5:12 for thou, lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou
compass him as with a shield.



6:1 O lord, rebuk me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy
hot displeasure.

6:2 have merci upon me, O lord; for I am weak: O lord, heal me; for my
bon are vexed.

6:3 My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O lord, how long?

6:4 return, O lord, deliv my soul: oh save me for thi mercies' sake.

6:5 for in death there is no remembr of thee: in the grave who
shal give thee thanks?

6:6 I am weari with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim;
i water my couch with my tears.

6:7 mine eye is consum becaus of grief; it waxeth old becaus of
al mine enemies.

6:8 depart from me, all ye worker of iniquity; for the lord hath
heard the voic of my weeping.

6:9 the lord hath heard my supplication; the lord will receiv my
prayer.

6:10 let all mine enemi be asham and sore vexed: let them return
and be asham suddenly.



7:1 O lord my god, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them
that persecut me, and deliv me:

7:2 lest he tear my soul like a lion, rend it in pieces, while
ther is none to deliver.

7:3 O lord my god, If I have done this; if there be iniqu in my
hands;

7:4 If I have reward evil unto him that wa at peac with me; (yea,
i have deliv him that without caus is mine enemy:)

7:5 let the enemi persecut my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread
down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. selah.

7:6 arise, O lord, in thine anger, lift up thyself becaus of the rage
of mine enemies: and awak for me to the judgment that thou hast
commanded.

7:7 So shall the congreg of the peopl compass thee about: for
their sake therefor return thou on high.

7:8 the lord shall judg the people: judg me, O lord, accord to my
righteousness, and accord to mine integr that is in me.

7:9 Oh let the wicked of the wick come to an end; but establish
th just: for the righteou god trieth the heart and reins.

7:10 My defenc is of god, which saveth the upright in heart.

7:11 god judgeth the righteous, and god is angri with the wick every
day.

7:12 If he turn not, he will whet hi sword; he hath bent hi bow, and
mad it ready.

7:13 He hath also prepar for him the instrument of death; he
ordaineth hi arrow against the persecutors.

7:14 behold, he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceiv mischief,
and brought forth falsehood.

7:15 He made a pit, and dig it, and is fallen into the ditch which
h made.

7:16 hi mischief shall return upon hi own head, and hi violent
d shall come down upon hi own pate.

7:17 I will prais the lord accord to hi righteousness: and will
s prais to the name of the lord most high.



8:1 O lord, our lord, how excel is thi name in all the earth! who
hast set thi glori abov the heavens.

8:2 out of the mouth of babe and suckl hast thou ordained
strength becaus of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy
and the avenger.

8:3 when I consid thi heavens, the work of thi fingers, the moon and
th stars, which thou hast ordained;

8:4 what is man, that thou art mind of him? and the son of man,
that thou visitest him?

8:5 for thou hast made him a littl lower than the angels, and hast
crown him with glori and honour.

8:6 thou madest him to have dominion over the work of thi hands; thou
hast put all thing under hi feet:

8:7 all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beast of the field;

8:8 the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever
passeth through the path of the seas.

8:9 O lord our lord, how excel is thi name in all the earth!


9:1 I will prais thee, O lord, with my whole heart; I will shew forth
al thi marvel works.

9:2 I will be glad and rejoic in thee: I will sing prais to thy
name, O thou most high.

9:3 when mine enemi are turn back, they shall fall and perish at
thi presence.

9:4 for thou hast maintain my right and my cause; thou satest in the
thron judg right.

9:5 thou hast rebuk the heathen, thou hast destroy the wicked,
th hast put out their name for ever and ever.

9:6 O thou enemy, destruct are come to a perpetu end: and thou
hast destroy cities; their memori is perish with them.

9:7 but the lord shall endur for ever: he hath prepar hi throne
for judgment.

9:8 and he shall judg the world in righteousness, he shall minister
judg to the peopl in uprightness.

9:9 the lord also will be a refug for the oppressed, a refug in
tim of trouble.

9:10 and they that know thi name will put their trust in thee: for
thou, lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.

9:11 sing prais to the lord, which dwelleth in zion: declar among
th peopl hi doings.

9:12 when he maketh inquisit for blood, he remembereth them: he
forgetteth not the cri of the humble.

9:13 have merci upon me, O lord; consid my troubl which I suffer of
them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gate of death:

9:14 that I may shew forth all thi prais in the gate of the daughter
of zion: I will rejoic in thi salvation.

9:15 the heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net
which they hid is their own foot taken.

9:16 the lord is known by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked
i snare in the work of hi own hands. higgaion. selah.

9:17 the wick shall be turn into hell, and all the nation that
forget god.

9:18 for the needi shall not alway be forgotten: the expect of
th poor shall not perish for ever.

9:19 arise, O lord; let not man prevail: let the heathen be judg in
thi sight.

9:20 put them in fear, O lord: that the nation may know themselv to
b but men. selah.



10:1 whi standest thou afar off, O lord? whi hidest thou thyself in
tim of trouble?

10:2 the wick in hi pride doth persecut the poor: let them be
taken in the devic that they have imagined.

10:3 for the wick boasteth of hi heart' desire, and blesseth the
covetous, whom the lord abhorreth.

10:4 the wicked, through the pride of hi countenance, will not seek
aft god: god is not in all hi thoughts.

10:5 hi way are alway grievous; thi judgment are far abov out of
hi sight: as for all hi enemies, he puffeth at them.

10:6 He hath said in hi heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall
nev be in adversity.

10:7 hi mouth is full of curs and deceit and fraud: under his
tongu is mischief and vanity.

10:8 He sitteth in the lurk place of the villages: in the secret
plac doth he murder the innocent: hi eye are privili set against
th poor.

10:9 He lieth in wait secretli as a lion in hi den: he lieth in wait
to catch the poor: he doth catch the poor, when he draweth him into
hi net.

10:10 He croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by
hi strong ones.

10:11 He hath said in hi heart, god hath forgotten: he hideth his
face; he will never see it.

10:12 arise, O lord; O god, lift up thine hand: forget not the humble.

10:13 wherefor doth the wick contemn god? he hath said in his
heart, thou wilt not requir it.

10:14 thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to
requit it with thi hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou
art the helper of the fatherless.

10:15 break thou the arm of the wick and the evil man: seek out his
wicked till thou find none.

10:16 the lord is king for ever and ever: the heathen are perish out
of hi land.

10:17 lord, thou hast heard the desir of the humble: thou wilt
prepar their heart, thou wilt caus thine ear to hear:

10:18 To judg the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the
earth may no more oppress.



11:1 In the lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, flee as a bird
to your mountain?

11:2 for, lo, the wick bend their bow, they make readi their arrow
upon the string, that they may privili shoot at the upright in heart.

11:3 If the foundat be destroyed, what can the righteou do?

11:4 the lord is in hi holi temple, the lord' throne is in heaven:
hi eye behold, hi eyelid try, the children of men.

11:5 the lord trieth the righteous: but the wick and him that loveth
viol hi soul hateth.

11:6 upon the wick he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horr tempest: thi shall be the portion of their cup.

11:7 for the righteou lord loveth righteousness; hi counten doth
behold the upright.



12:1 help, lord; for the godli man ceaseth; for the faith fail from
among the children of men.

12:2 they speak vaniti everi one with hi neighbour: with flattering
lip and with a doubl heart do they speak.

12:3 the lord shall cut off all flatter lips, and the tongu that
speaketh proud things:

12:4 who have said, with our tongu will we prevail; our lip are our
own: who is lord over us?

12:5 for the oppress of the poor, for the sigh of the needy, now
wil I arise, saith the lord; I will set him in safeti from him that
puffeth at him.

12:6 the word of the lord are pure words: as silver tri in a
furnac of earth, purifi seven times.

12:7 thou shalt keep them, O lord, thou shalt preserv them from this
gener for ever.

12:8 the wick walk on everi side, when the vilest men are exalted.



13:1 how long wilt thou forget me, O lord? for ever? how long wilt
thou hide thi face from me?

13:2 how long shall I take counsel in my soul, have sorrow in my
heart daily? how long shall mine enemi be exalt over me?

13:3 consid and hear me, O lord my god: lighten mine eyes, lest i
sleep the sleep of death;

13:4 lest mine enemi say, I have prevail against him; and those that
troubl me rejoic when I am moved.

13:5 but I have trust in thi mercy; my heart shall rejoic in thy
salvation.

13:6 I will sing unto the lord, becaus he hath dealt bounti with
me.



14:1 the fool hath said in hi heart, there is no god. they are
corrupt, they have done abomin works, there is none that doeth
good.

14:2 the lord look down from heaven upon the children of men, to see
if there were ani that did understand, and seek god.

14:3 they are all gone aside, they are all togeth becom filthy:
ther is none that doeth good, no, not one.

14:4 have all the worker of iniqu no knowledge? who eat up my
peopl as they eat bread, and call not upon the lord.

14:5 there were they in great fear: for god is in the gener of
th righteous.

14:6 Ye have shame the counsel of the poor, becaus the lord is his
refuge.

14:7 Oh that the salvat of israel were come out of zion! when the
lord bringeth back the captiv of hi people, jacob shall rejoice,
and israel shall be glad.



15:1 lord, who shall abid in thi tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy
holi hill?

15:2 He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and
speaketh the truth in hi heart.

15:3 He that backbiteth not with hi tongue, nor doeth evil to his
neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against hi neighbour.

15:4 In whose eye a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them
that fear the lord. He that sweareth to hi own hurt, and changeth
not.

15:5 He that putteth not out hi money to usury, nor taketh reward
against the innocent. He that doeth these thing shall never be moved.



16:1 preserv me, O god: for in thee do I put my trust.

16:2 O my soul, thou hast said unto the lord, thou art my lord: my
good extendeth not to thee;

16:3 but to the saint that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in
whom is all my delight.

16:4 their sorrow shall be multipli that hasten after anoth god:
their drink offer of blood will I not offer, nor take up their
nam into my lips.

16:5 the lord is the portion of mine inherit and of my cup: thou
maintainest my lot.

16:6 the line are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a
goodli heritage.

16:7 I will bless the lord, who hath given me counsel: my rein also
instruct me in the night seasons.

16:8 I have set the lord alway befor me: becaus he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved.

16:9 therefor my heart is glad, and my glori rejoiceth: my flesh also
shal rest in hope.

16:10 for thou wilt not leav my soul in hell; neither wilt thou
suff thine holi one to see corruption.

16:11 thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thi presenc is fulness
of joy; at thi right hand there are pleasur for evermore.



17:1 hear the right, O lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my
prayer, that goeth not out of feign lips.

17:2 let my sentenc come forth from thi presence; let thine eyes
behold the thing that are equal.

17:3 thou hast prove mine heart; thou hast visit me in the night;
thou hast tri me, and shalt find nothing; I am purpos that my
mouth shall not transgress.

17:4 concern the work of men, by the word of thi lip I have kept
m from the path of the destroyer.

17:5 hold up my go in thi paths, that my footstep slip not.

17:6 I have call upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, O god: incline
thin ear unto me, and hear my speech.

17:7 shew thi marvel lovingkindness, O thou that savest by thy
right hand them which put their trust in thee from those that rise up
against them.

17:8 keep me as the appl of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy
wings,

17:9 from the wick that oppress me, from my deadli enemies, who
compass me about.

17:10 they are inclos in their own fat: with their mouth they speak
proudly.

17:11 they have now compass us in our steps: they have set their
ey bow down to the earth;

17:12 like as a lion that is greedi of hi prey, and as it were a
young lion lurk in secret places.

17:13 arise, O lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliv my soul
from the wicked, which is thi sword:

17:14 from men which are thi hand, O lord, from men of the world,
which have their portion in thi life, and whose belli thou fillest
with thi hid treasure: they are full of children, and leav the rest
of their substanc to their babes.

17:15 As for me, I will behold thi face in righteousness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake, with thi likeness.



18:1 I will love thee, O lord, my strength.

18:2 the lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my god,
mi strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my
salvation, and my high tower.

18:3 I will call upon the lord, who is worthi to be praised: so shall
i be save from mine enemies.

18:4 the sorrow of death compass me, and the flood of ungodli men
mad me afraid.

18:5 the sorrow of hell compass me about: the snare of death
prev me.

18:6 In my distress I call upon the lord, and cri unto my god: he
heard my voic out of hi temple, and my cri came befor him, even
into hi ears.

18:7 then the earth shook and trembled; the foundat also of the
hil move and were shaken, becaus he wa wroth.

18:8 there went up a smoke out of hi nostrils, and fire out of his
mouth devoured: coal were kindl by it.

18:9 He bow the heaven also, and came down: and dark wa under
hi feet.

18:10 and he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fli upon the
w of the wind.

18:11 He made dark hi secret place; hi pavilion round about him
wer dark water and thick cloud of the skies.

18:12 At the bright that wa befor him hi thick cloud passed,
hail stone and coal of fire.

18:13 the lord also thunder in the heavens, and the highest gave his
voice; hail stone and coal of fire.

18:14 yea, he sent out hi arrows, and scatter them; and he shot out
lightnings, and discomfit them.

18:15 then the channel of water were seen, and the foundat of
th world were discov at thi rebuke, O lord, at the blast of the
breath of thi nostrils.

18:16 He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of mani waters.

18:17 He deliv me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated
me: for they were too strong for me.

18:18 they prevent me in the day of my calamity: but the lord wa my
stay.

18:19 He brought me forth also into a larg place; he deliv me,
becaus he delight in me.

18:20 the lord reward me accord to my righteousness; accord to
th clean of my hand hath he recompens me.

18:21 for I have kept the way of the lord, and have not wickedly
depart from my god.

18:22 for all hi judgment were befor me, and I did not put away his
statut from me.

18:23 I wa also upright befor him, and I kept myself from mine
iniquity.

18:24 therefor hath the lord recompens me accord to my
righteousness, accord to the clean of my hand in hi eyesight.

18:25 with the merci thou wilt shew thyself merciful; with an
upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright;

18:26 with the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward
th wilt shew thyself froward.

18:27 for thou wilt save the afflict people; but wilt bring down
high looks.

18:28 for thou wilt light my candle: the lord my god will enlighten my
darkness.

18:29 for by thee I have run through a troop; and by my god have i
leap over a wall.

18:30 As for god, hi way is perfect: the word of the lord is tried:
h is a buckler to all those that trust in him.

18:31 for who is god save the lord? or who is a rock save our god?

18:32 It is god that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way
perfect.

18:33 He maketh my feet like hinds' feet, and setteth me upon my high
places.

18:34 He teacheth my hand to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by
min arms.

18:35 thou hast also given me the shield of thi salvation: and thy
right hand hath holden me up, and thi gentl hath made me great.

18:36 thou hast enlarg my step under me, that my feet did not slip.

18:37 I have pursu mine enemies, and overtaken them: neither did i
turn again till they were consumed.

18:38 I have wound them that they were not abl to rise: they are
fallen under my feet.

18:39 for thou hast gird me with strength unto the battle: thou hast
subdu under me those that rose up against me.

18:40 thou hast also given me the neck of mine enemies; that I might
destroy them that hate me.

18:41 they cried, but there wa none to save them: even unto the lord,
but he answer them not.

18:42 then did I beat them small as the dust befor the wind: I did
cast them out as the dirt in the streets.

18:43 thou hast deliv me from the strive of the people; and
thou hast made me the head of the heathen: a peopl whom I have not
known shall serv me.

18:44 As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers
shal submit themselv unto me.

18:45 the stranger shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close
places.

18:46 the lord liveth; and bless be my rock; and let the god of my
salv be exalted.

18:47 It is god that avengeth me, and subdueth the peopl under me.

18:48 He delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up
abov those that rise up against me: thou hast deliv me from the
viol man.

18:49 therefor will I give thank unto thee, O lord, among the
heathen, and sing prais unto thi name.

18:50 great deliver giveth he to hi king; and sheweth merci to
hi anointed, to david, and to hi seed for evermore.



19:1 the heaven declar the glori of god; and the firmament sheweth
hi handywork.

19:2 day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth
knowledge.

19:3 there is no speech nor language, where their voic is not heard.

19:4 their line is gone out through all the earth, and their word to
th end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacl for the sun,

19:5 which is as a bridegroom come out of hi chamber, and rejoiceth
a a strong man to run a race.

19:6 hi go forth is from the end of the heaven, and hi circuit
unto the end of it: and there is noth hid from the heat thereof.

19:7 the law of the lord is perfect, convert the soul: the
testimoni of the lord is sure, make wise the simple.

19:8 the statut of the lord are right, rejoic the heart: the
command of the lord is pure, enlighten the eyes.

19:9 the fear of the lord is clean, endur for ever: the judgments
of the lord are true and righteou altogether.

19:10 more to be desir are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold:
sweet also than honey and the honeycomb.

19:11 moreov by them is thi servant warned: and in keep of them
ther is great reward.

19:12 who can understand hi errors? cleans thou me from secret
faults.

19:13 keep back thi servant also from presumptu sins; let them not
hav dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innoc from the great transgression.

19:14 let the word of my mouth, and the medit of my heart, be
accept in thi sight, O lord, my strength, and my redeemer.



20:1 the lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the god of
jacob defend thee;

20:2 send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of
zion;

20:3 rememb all thi offerings, and accept thi burnt sacrifice;
selah.

20:4 grant thee accord to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy
counsel.

20:5 We will rejoic in thi salvation, and in the name of our god we
wil set up our banners: the lord fulfil all thi petitions.

20:6 now know I that the lord saveth hi anointed; he will hear him
from hi holi heaven with the save strength of hi right hand.

20:7 some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember
th name of the lord our god.

20:8 they are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand
upright.

20:9 save, lord: let the king hear us when we call.



21:1 the king shall joy in thi strength, O lord; and in thi salvation
how greatli shall he rejoice!

21:2 thou hast given him hi heart' desire, and hast not withholden
th request of hi lips. selah.

21:3 for thou preventest him with the bless of goodness: thou
settest a crown of pure gold on hi head.

21:4 He ask life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of
day for ever and ever.

21:5 hi glori is great in thi salvation: honour and majesti hast thou
laid upon him.

21:6 for thou hast made him most bless for ever: thou hast made him
exceed glad with thi countenance.

21:7 for the king trusteth in the lord, and through the merci of the
most high he shall not be moved.

21:8 thine hand shall find out all thine enemies: thi right hand shall
find out those that hate thee.

21:9 thou shalt make them as a fieri oven in the time of thine anger:
th lord shall swallow them up in hi wrath, and the fire shall devour
them.

21:10 their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed
from among the children of men.

21:11 for they intend evil against thee: they imagin a mischievous
device, which they are not abl to perform.

21:12 therefor shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt
mak readi thine arrow upon thi string against the face of them.

21:13 Be thou exalted, lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing
and prais thi power.



22:1 My god, my god, whi hast thou forsaken me? whi art thou so far
from help me, and from the word of my roaring?

22:2 O my god, I cri in the day time, but thou hearest not; and in the
night season, and am not silent.

22:3 but thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the prais of israel.

22:4 our father trust in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver
them.

22:5 they cri unto thee, and were delivered: they trust in thee,
and were not confounded.

22:6 but I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despis of
th people.

22:7 all they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip,
they shake the head, saying,

22:8 He trust on the lord that he would deliv him: let him deliver
him, see he delight in him.

22:9 but thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me
hop when I wa upon my mother' breasts.

22:10 I wa cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my god from my
mother' belly.

22:11 Be not far from me; for troubl is near; for there is none to
help.

22:12 mani bull have compass me: strong bull of bashan have beset
m round.

22:13 they gape upon me with their mouths, as a raven and a
roar lion.

22:14 I am pour out like water, and all my bone are out of joint:
mi heart is like wax; it is melt in the midst of my bowels.

22:15 My strength is dri up like a potsherd; and my tongu cleaveth
to my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death.

22:16 for dog have compass me: the assembl of the wick have
inclos me: they pierc my hand and my feet.

22:17 I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.

22:18 they part my garment among them, and cast lot upon my vesture.

22:19 but be not thou far from me, O lord: O my strength, hast thee
to help me.

22:20 deliv my soul from the sword; my darl from the power of the
dog.

22:21 save me from the lion' mouth: for thou hast heard me from the
horn of the unicorns.

22:22 I will declar thi name unto my brethren: in the midst of the
congreg will I prais thee.

22:23 Ye that fear the lord, prais him; all ye the seed of jacob,
glorifi him; and fear him, all ye the seed of israel.

22:24 for he hath not despis nor abhor the afflict of the
afflicted; neither hath he hid hi face from him; but when he cried
unto him, he heard.

22:25 My prais shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay
mi vow befor them that fear him.

22:26 the meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall prais the lord
that seek him: your heart shall live for ever.

22:27 all the end of the world shall rememb and turn unto the lord:
and all the kindr of the nation shall worship befor thee.

22:28 for the kingdom is the lord's: and he is the governor among the
nations.

22:29 all they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: all they
that go down to the dust shall bow befor him: and none can keep alive
hi own soul.

22:30 A seed shall serv him; it shall be account to the lord for a
generation.

22:31 they shall come, and shall declar hi righteous unto a
peopl that shall be born, that he hath done this.



23:1 the lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

23:2 He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside
th still waters.

23:3 He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the path of righteousness
for hi name' sake.

23:4 yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, i
wil fear no evil: for thou art with me; thi rod and thi staff they
comfort me.

23:5 thou preparest a tabl befor me in the presenc of mine enemies:
th anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.

23:6 sure good and merci shall follow me all the day of my
life: and I will dwell in the hous of the lord for ever.



24:1 the earth is the lord's, and the ful thereof; the world, and
they that dwell therein.

24:2 for he hath found it upon the seas, and establish it upon the
floods.

24:3 who shall ascend into the hill of the lord? or who shall stand in
hi holi place?

24:4 He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted
up hi soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

24:5 He shall receiv the bless from the lord, and righteousness
from the god of hi salvation.

24:6 thi is the gener of them that seek him, that seek thi face,
o jacob. selah.

24:7 lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
doors; and the king of glori shall come in.

24:8 who is thi king of glory? the lord strong and mighty, the lord
mighti in battle.

24:9 lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting
doors; and the king of glori shall come in.

24:10 who is thi king of glory? the lord of hosts, he is the king of
glory. selah.



25:1 unto thee, O lord, do I lift up my soul.

25:2 O my god, I trust in thee: let me not be ashamed, let not mine
enemi triumph over me.

25:3 yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed
which transgress without cause.

25:4 shew me thi ways, O lord; teach me thi paths.

25:5 lead me in thi truth, and teach me: for thou art the god of my
salvation; on thee do I wait all the day.

25:6 remember, O lord, thi tender merci and thi lovingkindnesses;
for they have been ever of old.

25:7 rememb not the sin of my youth, nor my transgressions:
accord to thi merci rememb thou me for thi goodness' sake, o
lord.

25:8 good and upright is the lord: therefor will he teach sinner in
th way.

25:9 the meek will he guid in judgment: and the meek will he teach
hi way.

25:10 all the path of the lord are merci and truth unto such as keep
hi coven and hi testimonies.

25:11 for thi name' sake, O lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is
great.

25:12 what man is he that feareth the lord? him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose.

25:13 hi soul shall dwell at ease; and hi seed shall inherit the
earth.

25:14 the secret of the lord is with them that fear him; and he will
shew them hi covenant.

25:15 mine eye are ever toward the lord; for he shall pluck my feet
out of the net.

25:16 turn thee unto me, and have merci upon me; for I am desol and
afflicted.

25:17 the troubl of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my
distresses.

25:18 look upon mine afflict and my pain; and forgiv all my sins.

25:19 consid mine enemies; for they are many; and they hate me with
cruel hatred.

25:20 O keep my soul, and deliv me: let me not be ashamed; for I put
mi trust in thee.

25:21 let integr and upright preserv me; for I wait on thee.

25:22 redeem israel, O god, out of all hi troubles.



26:1 judg me, O lord; for I have walk in mine integrity: I have
trust also in the lord; therefor I shall not slide.

26:2 examin me, O lord, and prove me; tri my rein and my heart.

26:3 for thi lovingkind is befor mine eyes: and I have walk in
thi truth.

26:4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers.

26:5 I have hate the congreg of evil doers; and will not sit
with the wicked.

26:6 I will wash mine hand in innocency: so will I compass thine
altar, O lord:

26:7 that I may publish with the voic of thanksgiving, and tell of
al thi wondrou works.

26:8 lord, I have love the habit of thi house, and the place
wher thine honour dwelleth.

26:9 gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloodi men:

26:10 In whose hand is mischief, and their right hand is full of
bribes.

26:11 but as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be
merci unto me.

26:12 My foot standeth in an even place: in the congreg will i
bless the lord.



27:1 the lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the
lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?

27:2 when the wicked, even mine enemi and my foes, came upon me to
eat up my flesh, they stumbl and fell.

27:3 though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear:
though war should rise against me, in thi will I be confident.

27:4 one thing have I desir of the lord, that will I seek after;
that I may dwell in the hous of the lord all the day of my life, to
behold the beauti of the lord, and to enquir in hi temple.

27:5 for in the time of troubl he shall hide me in hi pavilion: in
th secret of hi tabernacl shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon
a rock.

27:6 and now shall mine head be lift up abov mine enemi round
about me: therefor will I offer in hi tabernacl sacrific of joy;
i will sing, yea, I will sing prais unto the lord.

27:7 hear, O lord, when I cri with my voice: have merci also upon me,
and answer me.

27:8 when thou saidst, seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, thy
face, lord, will I seek.

27:9 hide not thi face far from me; put not thi servant away in anger:
th hast been my help; leav me not, neither forsak me, O god of my
salvation.

27:10 when my father and my mother forsak me, then the lord will take
m up.

27:11 teach me thi way, O lord, and lead me in a plain path, because
of mine enemies.

27:12 deliv me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false
wit are risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty.

27:13 I had fainted, unless I had believ to see the good of the
lord in the land of the living.

27:14 wait on the lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thin heart: wait, I say, on the lord.



28:1 unto thee will I cry, O lord my rock; be not silent to me: lest,
if thou be silent to me, I becom like them that go down into the pit.

28:2 hear the voic of my supplications, when I cri unto thee, when i
lift up my hand toward thi holi oracle.

28:3 draw me not away with the wicked, and with the worker of
iniquity, which speak peac to their neighbours, but mischief is in
their hearts.

28:4 give them accord to their deeds, and accord to the
wicked of their endeavours: give them after the work of their
hands; render to them their desert.

28:5 becaus they regard not the work of the lord, nor the operation
of hi hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

28:6 bless be the lord, becaus he hath heard the voic of my
supplications.

28:7 the lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trust in him,
and I am helped: therefor my heart greatli rejoiceth; and with my
song will I prais him.

28:8 the lord is their strength, and he is the save strength of his
anointed.

28:9 save thi people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and
lift them up for ever.



29:1 give unto the lord, O ye mighty, give unto the lord glori and
strength.

29:2 give unto the lord the glori due unto hi name; worship the lord
in the beauti of holiness.

29:3 the voic of the lord is upon the waters: the god of glory
thundereth: the lord is upon mani waters.

29:4 the voic of the lord is powerful; the voic of the lord is full
of majesty.

29:5 the voic of the lord breaketh the cedars; yea, the lord breaketh
th cedar of lebanon.

29:6 He maketh them also to skip like a calf; lebanon and sirion like
a young unicorn.

29:7 the voic of the lord divideth the flame of fire.

29:8 the voic of the lord shaketh the wilderness; the lord shaketh
th wilder of kadesh.

29:9 the voic of the lord maketh the hind to calve, and discovereth
th forests: and in hi templ doth everi one speak of hi glory.

29:10 the lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, the lord sitteth king for
ever.

29:11 the lord will give strength unto hi people; the lord will bless
hi peopl with peace.



30:1 I will extol thee, O lord; for thou hast lift me up, and hast
not made my foe to rejoic over me.

30:2 O lord my god, I cri unto thee, and thou hast heal me.

30:3 O lord, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave: thou hast
kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.

30:4 sing unto the lord, O ye saint of his, and give thank at the
remembr of hi holiness.

30:5 for hi anger endureth but a moment; in hi favour is life:
weep may endur for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.

30:6 and in my prosper I said, I shall never be moved.

30:7 lord, by thi favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong:
thou didst hide thi face, and I wa troubled.

30:8 I cri to thee, O lord; and unto the lord I made supplication.

30:9 what profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit?
shal the dust prais thee? shall it declar thi truth?

30:10 hear, O lord, and have merci upon me: lord, be thou my helper.

30:11 thou hast turn for me my mourn into dancing: thou hast put
off my sackcloth, and gird me with gladness;

30:12 To the end that my glori may sing prais to thee, and not be
silent.

o lord my god, I will give thank unto thee for ever.



31:1 In thee, O lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed:
deliv me in thi righteousness.

31:2 bow down thine ear to me; deliv me speedily: be thou my strong
rock, for an hous of defenc to save me.

31:3 for thou art my rock and my fortress; therefor for thi name's
sak lead me, and guid me.

31:4 pull me out of the net that they have laid privili for me: for
thou art my strength.

31:5 into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeem me, O lord
god of truth.

31:6 I have hate them that regard lie vanities: but I trust in the
lord.

31:7 I will be glad and rejoic in thi mercy: for thou hast considered
mi trouble; thou hast known my soul in adversities;

31:8 and hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast set
mi feet in a larg room.

31:9 have merci upon me, O lord, for I am in trouble: mine eye is
consum with grief, yea, my soul and my belly.

31:10 for my life is spent with grief, and my year with sighing: my
strength faileth becaus of mine iniquity, and my bone are consumed.

31:11 I wa a reproach among all mine enemies, but especi among my
neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me
without fled from me.

31:12 I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken
vessel.

31:13 for I have heard the slander of many: fear wa on everi side:
whil they took counsel togeth against me, they devis to take away
mi life.

31:14 but I trust in thee, O lord: I said, thou art my god.

31:15 My time are in thi hand: deliv me from the hand of mine
enemies, and from them that persecut me.

31:16 make thi face to shine upon thi servant: save me for thy
mercies' sake.

31:17 let me not be ashamed, O lord; for I have call upon thee: let
th wick be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.

31:18 let the lie lip be put to silence; which speak grievous
th proudli and contemptu against the righteous.

31:19 Oh how great is thi goodness, which thou hast laid up for them
that fear thee; which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee
befor the son of men!

31:20 thou shalt hide them in the secret of thi presenc from the
prid of man: thou shalt keep them secretli in a pavilion from the
strif of tongues.

31:21 bless be the lord: for he hath shew me hi marvellous
kind in a strong city.

31:22 for I said in my haste, I am cut off from befor thine eyes:
nevertheless thou heardest the voic of my supplic when I cried
unto thee.

31:23 O love the lord, all ye hi saints: for the lord preserveth the
faithful, and plenti rewardeth the proud doer.

31:24 Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye
that hope in the lord.



32:1 bless is he whose transgress is forgiven, whose sin is
covered.

32:2 bless is the man unto whom the lord imputeth not iniquity, and
in whose spirit there is no guile.

32:3 when I kept silence, my bone wax old through my roar all
th day long.

32:4 for day and night thi hand wa heavi upon me: my moistur is
turn into the drought of summer. selah.

32:5 I acknowledg my sin unto thee, and mine iniqu have I not hid.
i said, I will confess my transgress unto the lord; and thou
forgavest the iniqu of my sin. selah.

32:6 for thi shall everi one that is godli pray unto thee in a time
when thou mayest be found: sure in the flood of great water they
shal not come nigh unto him.

32:7 thou art my hide place; thou shalt preserv me from trouble;
th shalt compass me about with song of deliverance. selah.

32:8 I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt
go: I will guid thee with mine eye.

32:9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no
understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest
they come near unto thee.

32:10 mani sorrow shall be to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the
lord, merci shall compass him about.

32:11 Be glad in the lord, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for
joy, all ye that are upright in heart.



33:1 rejoic in the lord, O ye righteous: for prais is come for the
upright.

33:2 prais the lord with harp: sing unto him with the psalteri and an
instru of ten strings.

33:3 sing unto him a new song; play skil with a loud noise.

33:4 for the word of the lord is right; and all hi work are done in
truth.

33:5 He loveth righteous and judgment: the earth is full of the
good of the lord.

33:6 By the word of the lord were the heaven made; and all the host
of them by the breath of hi mouth.

33:7 He gathereth the water of the sea togeth as an heap: he layeth
up the depth in storehouses.

33:8 let all the earth fear the lord: let all the inhabit of the
world stand in awe of him.

33:9 for he spake, and it wa done; he commanded, and it stood fast.

33:10 the lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: he
maketh the devic of the peopl of none effect.

33:11 the counsel of the lord standeth for ever, the thought of his
heart to all generations.

33:12 bless is the nation whose god is the lord; and the peopl whom
h hath chosen for hi own inheritance.

33:13 the lord looketh from heaven; he beholdeth all the son of men.

33:14 from the place of hi habit he looketh upon all the
inhabit of the earth.

33:15 He fashioneth their heart alike; he considereth all their
works.

33:16 there is no king save by the multitud of an host: a mighti man
i not deliv by much strength.

33:17 An hors is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver
ani by hi great strength.

33:18 behold, the eye of the lord is upon them that fear him, upon
them that hope in hi mercy;

33:19 To deliv their soul from death, and to keep them aliv in
famine.

33:20 our soul waiteth for the lord: he is our help and our shield.

33:21 for our heart shall rejoic in him, becaus we have trust in
hi holi name.

33:22 let thi mercy, O lord, be upon us, accord as we hope in thee.



34:1 I will bless the lord at all times: hi prais shall continually
b in my mouth.

34:2 My soul shall make her boast in the lord: the humbl shall hear
thereof, and be glad.

34:3 O magnifi the lord with me, and let us exalt hi name together.

34:4 I sought the lord, and he heard me, and deliv me from all my
fears.

34:5 they look unto him, and were lightened: and their face were
not ashamed.

34:6 thi poor man cried, and the lord heard him, and save him out of
al hi troubles.

34:7 the angel of the lord encampeth round about them that fear him,
and delivereth them.

34:8 O tast and see that the lord is good: bless is the man that
trusteth in him.

34:9 O fear the lord, ye hi saints: for there is no want to them that
fear him.

34:10 the young lion do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek
th lord shall not want ani good thing.

34:11 come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of
th lord.

34:12 what man is he that desireth life, and loveth mani days, that he
may see good?

34:13 keep thi tongu from evil, and thi lip from speak guile.

34:14 depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursu it.

34:15 the eye of the lord are upon the righteous, and hi ear are
open unto their cry.

34:16 the face of the lord is against them that do evil, to cut off
th remembr of them from the earth.

34:17 the righteou cry, and the lord heareth, and delivereth them out
of all their troubles.

34:18 the lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart; and
saveth such as be of a contrit spirit.

34:19 mani are the afflict of the righteous: but the lord
delivereth him out of them all.

34:20 He keepeth all hi bones: not one of them is broken.

34:21 evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous
shal be desolate.

34:22 the lord redeemeth the soul of hi servants: and none of them
that trust in him shall be desolate.



35:1 plead my cause, O lord, with them that strive with me: fight
against them that fight against me.

35:2 take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.

35:3 draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that
persecut me: say unto my soul, I am thi salvation.

35:4 let them be confound and put to shame that seek after my soul:
let them be turn back and brought to confus that devis my hurt.

35:5 let them be as chaff befor the wind: and let the angel of the
lord chase them.

35:6 let their way be dark and slippery: and let the angel of the lord
persecut them.

35:7 for without caus have they hid for me their net in a pit, which
without caus they have dig for my soul.

35:8 let destruct come upon him at unawares; and let hi net that
h hath hid catch himself: into that veri destruct let him fall.

35:9 and my soul shall be joy in the lord: it shall rejoic in his
salvation.

35:10 all my bone shall say, lord, who is like unto thee, which
deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor
and the needi from him that spoileth him?

35:11 fals wit did rise up; they laid to my charg thing that
i knew not.

35:12 they reward me evil for good to the spoil of my soul.

35:13 but as for me, when they were sick, my cloth wa sackcloth: i
humbl my soul with fasting; and my prayer return into mine own
bosom.

35:14 I behav myself as though he had been my friend or brother: i
bow down heavily, as one that mourneth for hi mother.

35:15 but in mine advers they rejoiced, and gather themselves
together: yea, the abject gather themselv togeth against me,
and I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceas not:

35:16 with hypocrit mocker in feasts, they gnash upon me with
their teeth.

35:17 lord, how long wilt thou look on? rescu my soul from their
destructions, my darl from the lions.

35:18 I will give thee thank in the great congregation: I will praise
the among much people.

35:19 let not them that are mine enemi wrong rejoic over me:
neith let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

35:20 for they speak not peace: but they devis deceit matters
against them that are quiet in the land.

35:21 yea, they open their mouth wide against me, and said, aha,
aha, our eye hath seen it.

35:22 thi thou hast seen, O lord: keep not silence: O lord, be not
far from me.

35:23 stir up thyself, and awak to my judgment, even unto my cause,
mi god and my lord.

35:24 judg me, O lord my god, accord to thi righteousness; and let
them not rejoic over me.

35:25 let them not say in their hearts, ah, so would we have it: let
them not say, We have swallow him up.

35:26 let them be asham and brought to confus togeth that
rejoic at mine hurt: let them be cloth with shame and dishonour
that magnifi themselv against me.

35:27 let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous
cause: yea, let them say continually, let the lord be magnified, which
hath pleasur in the prosper of hi servant.

35:28 and my tongu shall speak of thi righteous and of thi praise
al the day long.



36:1 the transgress of the wick saith within my heart, that there
i no fear of god befor hi eyes.

36:2 for he flattereth himself in hi own eyes, until hi iniqu be
found to be hateful.

36:3 the word of hi mouth are iniqu and deceit: he hath left off
to be wise, and to do good.

36:4 He deviseth mischief upon hi bed; he setteth himself in a way
that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.

36:5 thi mercy, O lord, is in the heavens; and thi faithfulness
reacheth unto the clouds.

36:6 thi righteous is like the great mountains; thi judgment are
a great deep: O lord, thou preservest man and beast.

36:7 how excel is thi lovingkindness, O god! therefor the
children of men put their trust under the shadow of thi wings.

36:8 they shall be abundantli satisfi with the fat of thi house;
and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thi pleasures.

36:9 for with thee is the fountain of life: in thi light shall we see
light.

36:10 O continu thi lovingkind unto them that know thee; and thy
right to the upright in heart.

36:11 let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand
of the wick remov me.

36:12 there are the worker of iniqu fallen: they are cast down,
and shall not be abl to rise.



37:1 fret not thyself becaus of evildoers, neither be thou envious
against the worker of iniquity.

37:2 for they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the
green herb.

37:3 trust in the lord, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land,
and verili thou shalt be fed.

37:4 delight thyself also in the lord: and he shall give thee the
desir of thine heart.

37:5 commit thi way unto the lord; trust also in him; and he shall
br it to pass.

37:6 and he shall bring forth thi righteous as the light, and thy
judg as the noonday.

37:7 rest in the lord, and wait patient for him: fret not thyself
becaus of him who prospereth in hi way, becaus of the man who
bringeth wick devic to pass.

37:8 ceas from anger, and forsak wrath: fret not thyself in ani wise
to do evil.

37:9 for evildo shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the
lord, they shall inherit the earth.

37:10 for yet a littl while, and the wick shall not be: yea, thou
shalt dilig consid hi place, and it shall not be.

37:11 but the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall delight
themselv in the abund of peace.

37:12 the wick plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with
hi teeth.

37:13 the lord shall laugh at him: for he seeth that hi day is
coming.

37:14 the wick have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to
cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright
conversation.

37:15 their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows
shal be broken.

37:16 A littl that a righteou man hath is better than the rich of
mani wicked.

37:17 for the arm of the wick shall be broken: but the lord
upholdeth the righteous.

37:18 the lord knoweth the day of the upright: and their inheritance
shal be for ever.

37:19 they shall not be asham in the evil time: and in the day of
famin they shall be satisfied.

37:20 but the wick shall perish, and the enemi of the lord shall
b as the fat of lambs: they shall consume; into smoke shall they
consum away.

37:21 the wick borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous
sheweth mercy, and giveth.

37:22 for such as be bless of him shall inherit the earth; and they
that be curs of him shall be cut off.

37:23 the step of a good man are order by the lord: and he
delighteth in hi way.

37:24 though he fall, he shall not be utterli cast down: for the lord
upholdeth him with hi hand.

37:25 I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the
right forsaken, nor hi seed beg bread.

37:26 He is ever merciful, and lendeth; and hi seed is blessed.

37:27 depart from evil, and do good; and dwell for evermore.

37:28 for the lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh not hi saints; they
ar preserv for ever: but the seed of the wick shall be cut off.

37:29 the righteou shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for
ever.

37:30 the mouth of the righteou speaketh wisdom, and hi tongue
talketh of judgment.

37:31 the law of hi god is in hi heart; none of hi step shall
slide.

37:32 the wick watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him.

37:33 the lord will not leav him in hi hand, nor condemn him when he
i judged.

37:34 wait on the lord, and keep hi way, and he shall exalt thee to
inherit the land: when the wick are cut off, thou shalt see it.

37:35 I have seen the wick in great power, and spread himself
lik a green bay tree.

37:36 yet he pass away, and, lo, he wa not: yea, I sought him, but
h could not be found.

37:37 mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace.

37:38 but the transgressor shall be destroy together: the end of
th wick shall be cut off.

37:39 but the salvat of the righteou is of the lord: he is their
strength in the time of trouble.

37:40 and the lord shall help them, and deliv them: he shall deliver
them from the wicked, and save them, becaus they trust in him.



38:1 O lord, rebuk me not in thi wrath: neither chasten me in thi hot
displeasure.

38:2 for thine arrow stick fast in me, and thi hand presseth me sore.

38:3 there is no sound in my flesh becaus of thine anger; neither
i there ani rest in my bone becaus of my sin.

38:4 for mine iniqu are gone over mine head: as an heavi burden
they are too heavi for me.

38:5 My wound stink and are corrupt becaus of my foolishness.

38:6 I am troubled; I am bow down greatly; I go mourn all the day
long.

38:7 for my loin are fill with a loathsom disease: and there is no
sound in my flesh.

38:8 I am feebl and sore broken: I have roar by reason of the
disquiet of my heart.

38:9 lord, all my desir is befor thee; and my groan is not hid
from thee.

38:10 My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the light of
min eyes, it also is gone from me.

38:11 My lover and my friend stand aloof from my sore; and my
kinsmen stand afar off.

38:12 they also that seek after my life lay snare for me: and they
that seek my hurt speak mischiev things, and imagin deceit all
th day long.

38:13 but I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I wa as a dumb man that
openeth not hi mouth.

38:14 thu I wa as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no
reproofs.

38:15 for in thee, O lord, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O lord my god.

38:16 for I said, hear me, lest otherwis they should rejoic over me:
when my foot slippeth, they magnifi themselv against me.

38:17 for I am readi to halt, and my sorrow is continu befor me.

38:18 for I will declar mine iniquity; I will be sorri for my sin.

38:19 but mine enemi are lively, and they are strong: and they that
hat me wrong are multiplied.

38:20 they also that render evil for good are mine adversaries;
becaus I follow the thing that good is.

38:21 forsak me not, O lord: O my god, be not far from me.

38:22 make hast to help me, O lord my salvation.



39:1 I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my
tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wick is before
me.

39:2 I wa dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good; and my
sorrow wa stirred.

39:3 My heart wa hot within me, while I wa muse the fire burned:
then spake I with my tongue,

39:4 lord, make me to know mine end, and the measur of my days, what
it is: that I may know how frail I am.

39:5 behold, thou hast made my day as an handbreadth; and mine age is
a noth befor thee: verili everi man at hi best state is
altogeth vanity.

selah.

39:6 sure everi man walketh in a vain shew: sure they are
disquiet in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall
gath them.

39:7 and now, lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

39:8 deliv me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach
of the foolish.

39:9 I wa dumb, I open not my mouth; becaus thou didst it.

39:10 remov thi stroke away from me: I am consum by the blow of
thin hand.

39:11 when thou with rebuk dost correct man for iniquity, thou
makest hi beauti to consum away like a moth: sure everi man is
vanity. selah.

39:12 hear my prayer, O lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy
peac at my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as
al my father were.

39:13 O spare me, that I may recov strength, befor I go hence, and
b no more.



40:1 I wait patient for the lord; and he inclin unto me, and
heard my cry.

40:2 He brought me up also out of an horribl pit, out of the miry
clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and establish my goings.

40:3 and he hath put a new song in my mouth, even prais unto our god:
mani shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the lord.

40:4 bless is that man that maketh the lord hi trust, and
respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn asid to lies.

40:5 many, O lord my god, are thi wonder work which thou hast
done, and thi thought which are to us-ward: they cannot be reckoned
up in order unto thee: if I would declar and speak of them, they are
mor than can be numbered.

40:6 sacrific and offer thou didst not desire; mine ear hast thou
opened: burnt offer and sin offer hast thou not required.

40:7 then said I, lo, I come: in the volum of the book it is written
of me,

40:8 I delight to do thi will, O my god: yea, thi law is within my
heart.

40:9 I have preach righteous in the great congregation: lo, i
hav not refrain my lips, O lord, thou knowest.

40:10 I have not hid thi righteous within my heart; I have
declar thi faith and thi salvation: I have not conceal thy
lovingkind and thi truth from the great congregation.

40:11 withhold not thou thi tender merci from me, O lord: let thy
lovingkind and thi truth continu preserv me.

40:12 for innumer evil have compass me about: mine iniquities
hav taken hold upon me, so that I am not abl to look up; they are
mor than the hair of mine head: therefor my heart faileth me.

40:13 Be pleased, O lord, to deliv me: O lord, make hast to help
me.

40:14 let them be asham and confound togeth that seek after my
soul to destroy it; let them be driven backward and put to shame that
wish me evil.

40:15 let them be desol for a reward of their shame that say unto
me, aha, aha.

40:16 let all those that seek thee rejoic and be glad in thee: let
such as love thi salvat say continually, the lord be magnified.

40:17 but I am poor and needy; yet the lord thinketh upon me: thou art
mi help and my deliverer; make no tarrying, O my god.



41:1 bless is he that considereth the poor: the lord will deliver
him in time of trouble.

41:2 the lord will preserv him, and keep him alive; and he shall be
bless upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliv him unto the will of
hi enemies.

41:3 the lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou
wilt make all hi bed in hi sickness.

41:4 I said, lord, be merci unto me: heal my soul; for I have
sin against thee.

41:5 mine enemi speak evil of me, when shall he die, and hi name
perish?

41:6 and if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity: hi heart gathereth
iniqu to itself; when he goeth abroad, he telleth it.

41:7 all that hate me whisper togeth against me: against me do they
devis my hurt.

41:8 An evil disease, say they, cleaveth fast unto him: and now that
h lieth he shall rise up no more.

41:9 yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat
of my bread, hath lift up hi heel against me.

41:10 but thou, O lord, be merci unto me, and rais me up, that i
may requit them.

41:11 By thi I know that thou favourest me, becaus mine enemi doth
not triumph over me.

41:12 and as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest
m befor thi face for ever.

41:13 bless be the lord god of israel from everlasting, and to
everlasting. amen, and amen.



42:1 As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul
aft thee, O god.

42:2 My soul thirsteth for god, for the live god: when shall I come
and appear befor god?

42:3 My tear have been my meat day and night, while they continually
say unto me, where is thi god?

42:4 when I rememb these things, I pour out my soul in me: for I had
gon with the multitude, I went with them to the hous of god, with
th voic of joy and praise, with a multitud that kept holyday.

42:5 whi art thou cast down, O my soul? and whi art thou disquiet in
me?  hope thou in god: for I shall yet prais him for the help of his
countenance.

42:6 O my god, my soul is cast down within me: therefor will i
rememb thee from the land of jordan, and of the hermonites, from the
hil mizar.

42:7 deep calleth unto deep at the nois of thi waterspouts: all thy
wav and thi billow are gone over me.

42:8 yet the lord will command hi lovingkind in the day time, and
in the night hi song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the god of
mi life.

42:9 I will say unto god my rock, whi hast thou forgotten me? whi go i
mourn becaus of the oppress of the enemy?

42:10 As with a sword in my bones, mine enemi reproach me; while
they say daili unto me, where is thi god?

42:11 whi art thou cast down, O my soul? and whi art thou disquieted
within me? hope thou in god: for I shall yet prais him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my god.



43:1 judg me, O god, and plead my caus against an ungodli nation: o
deliv me from the deceit and unjust man.

43:2 for thou art the god of my strength: whi dost thou cast me off?
whi go I mourn becaus of the oppress of the enemy?

43:3 O send out thi light and thi truth: let them lead me; let them
br me unto thi holi hill, and to thi tabernacles.

43:4 then will I go unto the altar of god, unto god my exceed joy:
yea, upon the harp will I prais thee, O god my god.

43:5 whi art thou cast down, O my soul? and whi art thou disquieted
within me? hope in god: for I shall yet prais him, who is the health
of my countenance, and my god.



44:1 We have heard with our ears, O god, our father have told us,
what work thou didst in their days, in the time of old.

44:2 how thou didst drive out the heathen with thi hand, and plantedst
them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out.

44:3 for they got not the land in possess by their own sword,
neith did their own arm save them: but thi right hand, and thine
arm, and the light of thi countenance, becaus thou hadst a favour
unto them.

44:4 thou art my king, O god: command deliver for jacob.

44:5 through thee will we push down our enemies: through thi name will
w tread them under that rise up against us.

44:6 for I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

44:7 but thou hast save us from our enemies, and hast put them to
sham that hate us.

44:8 In god we boast all the day long, and prais thi name for ever.

selah.

44:9 but thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth
with our armies.

44:10 thou makest us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate
u spoil for themselves.

44:11 thou hast given us like sheep appoint for meat; and hast
scatt us among the heathen.

44:12 thou sellest thi peopl for nought, and dost not increas thy
wealth by their price.

44:13 thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and a
deris to them that are round about us.

44:14 thou makest us a byword among the heathen, a shake of the head
among the people.

44:15 My confus is continu befor me, and the shame of my face
hath cover me,

44:16 for the voic of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason
of the enemi and avenger.

44:17 all thi is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee,
neith have we dealt fals in thi covenant.

44:18 our heart is not turn back, neither have our step declined
from thi way;

44:19 though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and
cov us with the shadow of death.

44:20 If we have forgotten the name of our god, or stretch out our
hand to a strang god;

44:21 shall not god search thi out? for he knoweth the secret of the
heart.

44:22 yea, for thi sake are we kill all the day long; we are counted
a sheep for the slaughter.

44:23 awake, whi sleepest thou, O lord? arise, cast us not off for
ever.

44:24 wherefor hidest thou thi face, and forgettest our affliction
and our oppression?

44:25 for our soul is bow down to the dust: our belli cleaveth unto
th earth.

44:26 aris for our help, and redeem us for thi mercies' sake.



45:1 My heart is indit a good matter: I speak of the thing which i
hav made touch the king: my tongu is the pen of a readi writer.

45:2 thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is pour into
thi lips: therefor god hath bless thee for ever.

45:3 gird thi sword upon thi thigh, O most mighty, with thi glori and
thi majesty.

45:4 and in thi majesti ride prosper becaus of truth and
meek and righteousness; and thi right hand shall teach thee
terr things.

45:5 thine arrow are sharp in the heart of the king' enemies;
wherebi the peopl fall under thee.

45:6 thi throne, O god, is for ever and ever: the sceptr of thy
kingdom is a right sceptre.

45:7 thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefor god,
thi god, hath anoint thee with the oil of glad abov thy
fellows.

45:8 all thi garment smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of
th ivori palaces, wherebi they have made thee glad.

45:9 kings' daughter were among thi honour women: upon thi right
hand did stand the queen in gold of ophir.

45:10 hearken, O daughter, and consider, and inclin thine ear; forget
also thine own people, and thi father' house;

45:11 So shall the king greatli desir thi beauty: for he is thi lord;
and worship thou him.

45:12 and the daughter of tyre shall be there with a gift; even the
rich among the peopl shall intreat thi favour.

45:13 the king' daughter is all gloriou within: her cloth is of
wrought gold.

45:14 she shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework: the
virgin her companion that follow her shall be brought unto thee.

45:15 with glad and rejoic shall they be brought: they shall
ent into the king' palace.

45:16 instead of thi father shall be thi children, whom thou mayest
mak princ in all the earth.

45:17 I will make thi name to be rememb in all generations:
therefor shall the peopl prais thee for ever and ever.



46:1 god is our refug and strength, a veri present help in trouble.

46:2 therefor will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and
though the mountain be carri into the midst of the sea;

46:3 though the water thereof roar and be troubled, though the
mountain shake with the swell thereof. selah.

46:4 there is a river, the stream whereof shall make glad the citi of
god, the holi place of the tabernacl of the most high.

46:5 god is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: god shall
help her, and that right early.

46:6 the heathen raged, the kingdom were moved: he utter hi voice,
th earth melted.

46:7 the lord of host is with us; the god of jacob is our refuge.
selah.

46:8 come, behold the work of the lord, what desol he hath made
in the earth.

46:9 He maketh war to ceas unto the end of the earth; he breaketh
th bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in
th fire.

46:10 Be still, and know that I am god: I will be exalt among the
heathen, I will be exalt in the earth.

46:11 the lord of host is with us; the god of jacob is our refuge.
selah.



47:1 O clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto god with the voice
of triumph.

47:2 for the lord most high is terrible; he is a great king over all
th earth.

47:3 He shall subdu the peopl under us, and the nation under our
feet.

47:4 He shall choos our inherit for us, the excel of jacob
whom he loved. selah.

47:5 god is gone up with a shout, the lord with the sound of a
trumpet.

47:6 sing prais to god, sing praises: sing prais unto our king,
s praises.

47:7 for god is the king of all the earth: sing ye prais with
understanding.

47:8 god reigneth over the heathen: god sitteth upon the throne of his
holiness.

47:9 the princ of the peopl are gather together, even the people
of the god of abraham: for the shield of the earth belong unto god:
h is greatli exalted.



48:1 great is the lord, and greatli to be prais in the citi of our
god, in the mountain of hi holiness.

48:2 beauti for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount
zion, on the side of the north, the citi of the great king.

48:3 god is known in her palac for a refuge.

48:4 for, lo, the king were assembled, they pass by together.

48:5 they saw it, and so they marvelled; they were troubled, and
hast away.

48:6 fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in
travail.

48:7 thou breakest the ship of tarshish with an east wind.

48:8 As we have heard, so have we seen in the citi of the lord of
hosts, in the citi of our god: god will establish it for ever. selah.

48:9 We have thought of thi lovingkindness, O god, in the midst of thy
temple.

48:10 accord to thi name, O god, so is thi prais unto the end of
th earth: thi right hand is full of righteousness.

48:11 let mount zion rejoice, let the daughter of judah be glad,
becaus of thi judgments.

48:12 walk about zion, and go round about her: tell the towers
thereof.

48:13 mark ye well her bulwarks, consid her palaces; that ye may
tel it to the gener following.

48:14 for thi god is our god for ever and ever: he will be our guide
even unto death.



49:1 hear this, all ye people; give ear, all ye inhabit of the
world:

49:2 both low and high, rich and poor, together.

49:3 My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the medit of my heart
shal be of understanding.

49:4 I will inclin mine ear to a parable: I will open my dark saying
upon the harp.

49:5 wherefor should I fear in the day of evil, when the iniqu of
mi heel shall compass me about?

49:6 they that trust in their wealth, and boast themselv in the
multitud of their riches;

49:7 none of them can by ani mean redeem hi brother, nor give to god
a ransom for him:

49:8 (for the redempt of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for
ever:)

49:9 that he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.

49:10 for he seeth that wise men die, likewis the fool and the
brutish person perish, and leav their wealth to others.

49:11 their inward thought is, that their hous shall continu for
ever, and their dwell place to all generations; they call their
land after their own names.

49:12 nevertheless man be in honour abideth not: he is like the
beast that perish.

49:13 thi their way is their folly: yet their poster approv their
sayings. selah.

49:14 like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them;
and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and
their beauti shall consum in the grave from their dwelling.

49:15 but god will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he
shal receiv me. selah.

49:16 Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glori of his
hous is increased;

49:17 for when he dieth he shall carri noth away: hi glori shall
not descend after him.

49:18 though while he live he bless hi soul: and men will praise
thee, when thou doest well to thyself.

49:19 He shall go to the gener of hi fathers; they shall never
se light.

49:20 man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts
that perish.



50:1 the mighti god, even the lord, hath spoken, and call the earth
from the rise of the sun unto the go down thereof.

50:2 out of zion, the perfect of beauty, god hath shined.

50:3 our god shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall
devour befor him, and it shall be veri tempestu round about him.

50:4 He shall call to the heaven from above, and to the earth, that
h may judg hi people.

50:5 gather my saint togeth unto me; those that have made a
coven with me by sacrifice.

50:6 and the heaven shall declar hi righteousness: for god is judge
himself. selah.

50:7 hear, O my people, and I will speak; O israel, and I will testify
against thee: I am god, even thi god.

50:8 I will not reprov thee for thi sacrific or thi burnt
offerings, to have been continu befor me.

50:9 I will take no bullock out of thi house, nor he goat out of thy
folds.

50:10 for everi beast of the forest is mine, and the cattl upon a
thousand hills.

50:11 I know all the fowl of the mountains: and the wild beast of
th field are mine.

50:12 If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine,
and the ful thereof.

50:13 will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?

50:14 offer unto god thanksgiving; and pay thi vow unto the most
high:

50:15 and call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliv thee, and
thou shalt glorifi me.

50:16 but unto the wick god saith, what hast thou to do to declare
mi statutes, or that thou shouldest take my coven in thi mouth?

50:17 see thou hatest instruction, and casteth my word behind
thee.

50:18 when thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and
hast been partak with adulterers.

50:19 thou givest thi mouth to evil, and thi tongu frameth deceit.

50:20 thou sittest and speakest against thi brother; thou slanderest
thin own mother' son.

50:21 these thing hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest
that I wa altogeth such an one as thyself: but I will reprov thee,
and set them in order befor thine eyes.

50:22 now consid this, ye that forget god, lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.

50:23 whoso offereth prais glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth
hi convers aright will I shew the salvat of god.



51:1 have merci upon me, O god, accord to thi lovingkindness:
accord unto the multitud of thi tender merci blot out my
transgressions.

51:2 wash me throughli from mine iniquity, and cleans me from my sin.

51:3 for I acknowledg my transgressions: and my sin is ever before
me.

51:4 against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done thi evil in thy
sight: that thou mightest be justifi when thou speakest, and be
clear when thou judgest.

51:5 behold, I wa shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother
conc me.

51:6 behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the
hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.

51:7 purg me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall
b whiter than snow.

51:8 make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bone which thou hast
broken may rejoice.

51:9 hide thi face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

51:10 creat in me a clean heart, O god; and renew a right spirit
within me.

51:11 cast me not away from thi presence; and take not thi holi spirit
from me.

51:12 restor unto me the joy of thi salvation; and uphold me with thy
fre spirit.

51:13 then will I teach transgressor thi ways; and sinner shall be
convert unto thee.

51:14 deliv me from bloodguiltiness, O god, thou god of my
salvation: and my tongu shall sing aloud of thi righteousness.

51:15 O lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy
praise.

51:16 for thou desirest not sacrifice; els would I give it: thou
delightest not in burnt offering.

51:17 the sacrific of god are a broken spirit: a broken and a
contrit heart, O god, thou wilt not despise.

51:18 Do good in thi good pleasur unto zion: build thou the wall of
jerusalem.

51:19 then shalt thou be pleas with the sacrific of righteousness,
with burnt offer and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer
bullock upon thine altar.



52:1 whi boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighti man? the goodness
of god endureth continually.

52:2 the tongu deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp razor, working
deceitfully.

52:3 thou lovest evil more than good; and lie rather than to speak
righteousness. selah.

52:4 thou lovest all devour words, O thou deceit tongue.

52:5 god shall likewis destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee
away, and pluck thee out of thi dwell place, and root thee out of
th land of the living. selah.

52:6 the righteou also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him:

52:7 lo, thi is the man that made not god hi strength; but trusted
in the abund of hi riches, and strengthen himself in his
wickedness.

52:8 but I am like a green oliv tree in the hous of god: I trust in
th merci of god for ever and ever.

52:9 I will prais thee for ever, becaus thou hast done it: and i
wil wait on thi name; for it is good befor thi saints.



53:1 the fool hath said in hi heart, there is no god. corrupt are
they, and have done abomin iniquity: there is none that doeth
good.

53:2 god look down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if
ther were ani that did understand, that did seek god.

53:3 everi one of them is gone back: they are altogeth become
filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

53:4 have the worker of iniqu no knowledge? who eat up my people
a they eat bread: they have not call upon god.

53:5 there were they in great fear, where no fear was: for god hath
scatt the bone of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put
them to shame, becaus god hath despis them.

53:6 Oh that the salvat of israel were come out of zion! when god
bringeth back the captiv of hi people, jacob shall rejoice, and
israel shall be glad.



54:1 save me, O god, by thi name, and judg me by thi strength.

54:2 hear my prayer, O god; give ear to the word of my mouth.

54:3 for stranger are risen up against me, and oppressor seek after
mi soul: they have not set god befor them. selah.

54:4 behold, god is mine helper: the lord is with them that uphold my
soul.

54:5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy
truth.

54:6 I will freeli sacrific unto thee: I will prais thi name, o
lord; for it is good.

54:7 for he hath deliv me out of all trouble: and mine eye hath
seen hi desir upon mine enemies.



55:1 give ear to my prayer, O god; and hide not thyself from my
supplication.

55:2 attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a
noise;

55:3 becaus of the voic of the enemy, becaus of the oppress of
th wicked: for they cast iniqu upon me, and in wrath they hate me.

55:4 My heart is sore pain within me: and the terror of death are
fallen upon me.

55:5 fear and trembl are come upon me, and horror hath
overwhelm me.

55:6 and I said, Oh that I had wing like a dove! for then would I fly
away, and be at rest.

55:7 lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness.
selah.

55:8 I would hasten my escap from the windi storm and tempest.

55:9 destroy, O lord, and divid their tongues: for I have seen
viol and strife in the city.

55:10 day and night they go about it upon the wall thereof: mischief
also and sorrow are in the midst of it.

55:11 wicked is in the midst thereof: deceit and guil depart not
from her streets.

55:12 for it wa not an enemi that reproach me; then I could have
born it: neither wa it he that hate me that did magnifi himself
against me; then I would have hid myself from him:

55:13 but it wa thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine
acquaintance.

55:14 We took sweet counsel together, and walk unto the hous of god
in company.

55:15 let death seiz upon them, and let them go down quick into hell:
for wicked is in their dwellings, and among them.

55:16 As for me, I will call upon god; and the lord shall save me.

55:17 evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cri aloud:
and he shall hear my voice.

55:18 He hath deliv my soul in peac from the battl that was
against me: for there were mani with me.

55:19 god shall hear, and afflict them, even he that abideth of old.

selah. becaus they have no changes, therefor they fear not god.

55:20 He hath put forth hi hand against such as be at peac with
him: he hath broken hi covenant.

55:21 the word of hi mouth were smoother than butter, but war wa in
hi heart: hi word were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.

55:22 cast thi burden upon the lord, and he shall sustain thee: he
shal never suffer the righteou to be moved.

55:23 but thou, O god, shalt bring them down into the pit of
destruction: bloodi and deceit men shall not live out half their
days; but I will trust in thee.



56:1 Be merci unto me, O god: for man would swallow me up; he
fight daili oppresseth me.

56:2 mine enemi would daili swallow me up: for they be mani that
fight against me, O thou most high.

56:3 what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.

56:4 In god I will prais hi word, in god I have put my trust; I will
not fear what flesh can do unto me.

56:5 everi day they wrest my words: all their thought are against me
for evil.

56:6 they gather themselv together, they hide themselves, they mark
mi steps, when they wait for my soul.

56:7 shall they escap by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the
people, O god.

56:8 thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tear into thi bottle:
ar they not in thi book?

56:9 when I cri unto thee, then shall mine enemi turn back: thi i
know; for god is for me.

56:10 In god will I prais hi word: in the lord will I prais his
word.

56:11 In god have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do
unto me.

56:12 thi vow are upon me, O god: I will render prais unto thee.

56:13 for thou hast deliv my soul from death: wilt not thou
deliv my feet from falling, that I may walk befor god in the light
of the living?



57:1 Be merci unto me, O god, be merci unto me: for my soul
trusteth in thee: yea, in the shadow of thi wing will I make my
refuge, until these calam be overpast.

57:2 I will cri unto god most high; unto god that performeth all
th for me.

57:3 He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him
that would swallow me up. selah. god shall send forth hi merci and
hi truth.

57:4 My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them that are set on
fire, even the son of men, whose teeth are spear and arrows, and
their tongu a sharp sword.

57:5 Be thou exalted, O god, abov the heavens; let thi glori be above
al the earth.

57:6 they have prepar a net for my steps; my soul is bow down:
they have dig a pit befor me, into the midst whereof they are
fallen themselves. selah.

57:7 My heart is fixed, O god, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give
praise.

57:8 awak up, my glory; awake, psalteri and harp: I myself will awake
early.

57:9 I will prais thee, O lord, among the people: I will sing unto
the among the nations.

57:10 for thi merci is great unto the heavens, and thi truth unto the
clouds.

57:11 Be thou exalted, O god, abov the heavens: let thi glori be
abov all the earth.



58:1 Do ye inde speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge
uprightly, O ye son of men?

58:2 yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violenc of your
hand in the earth.

58:3 the wick are estrang from the womb: they go astray as soon as
they be born, speak lies.

58:4 their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the
deaf adder that stoppeth her ear;

58:5 which will not hearken to the voic of charmers, charm never
so wisely.

58:6 break their teeth, O god, in their mouth: break out the great
teeth of the young lions, O lord.

58:7 let them melt away as water which run continually: when he
bendeth hi bow to shoot hi arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.

58:8 As a snail which melteth, let everi one of them pass away: like
th untim birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.

58:9 befor your pot can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as
with a whirlwind, both living, and in hi wrath.

58:10 the righteou shall rejoic when he seeth the vengeance: he
shal wash hi feet in the blood of the wicked.

58:11 So that a man shall say, verili there is a reward for the
righteous: verili he is a god that judgeth in the earth.



59:1 deliv me from mine enemies, O my god: defend me from them that
ris up against me.

59:2 deliv me from the worker of iniquity, and save me from bloody
men.

59:3 for, lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighti are gathered
against me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O lord.

59:4 they run and prepar themselv without my fault: awak to help
me, and behold.

59:5 thou therefore, O lord god of hosts, the god of israel, awak to
visit all the heathen: be not merci to ani wick transgressors.
selah.

59:6 they return at evening: they make a nois like a dog, and go
round about the city.

59:7 behold, they belch out with their mouth: sword are in their
lips: for who, say they, doth hear?

59:8 but thou, O lord, shalt laugh at them; thou shalt have all the
heathen in derision.

59:9 becaus of hi strength will I wait upon thee: for god is my
defence.

59:10 the god of my merci shall prevent me: god shall let me see my
desir upon mine enemies.

59:11 slay them not, lest my peopl forget: scatter them by thi power;
and bring them down, O lord our shield.

59:12 for the sin of their mouth and the word of their lip let them
even be taken in their pride: and for curs and lie which they
speak.

59:13 consum them in wrath, consum them, that they may not be: and
let them know that god ruleth in jacob unto the end of the earth.
selah.

59:14 and at even let them return; and let them make a nois like a
dog, and go round about the city.

59:15 let them wander up and down for meat, and grudg if they be not
satisfied.

59:16 but I will sing of thi power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy
merci in the morning: for thou hast been my defenc and refug in the
day of my trouble.

59:17 unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for god is my defence,
and the god of my mercy.



60:1 O god, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scatter us, thou hast
been displeased; O turn thyself to us again.

60:2 thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal
th breach thereof; for it shaketh.

60:3 thou hast shew thi peopl hard things: thou hast made us to
drink the wine of astonishment.

60:4 thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be
display becaus of the truth. selah.

60:5 that thi belov may be delivered; save with thi right hand, and
hear me.

60:6 god hath spoken in hi holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide
shechem, and mete out the valley of succoth.

60:7 gilead is mine, and manasseh is mine; ephraim also is the
strength of mine head; judah is my lawgiver;

60:8 moab is my washpot; over edom will I cast out my shoe: philistia,
triumph thou becaus of me.

60:9 who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
edom?

60:10 wilt not thou, O god, which hadst cast us off? and thou, O god,
which didst not go out with our armies?

60:11 give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

60:12 through god we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread
down our enemies.



61:1 hear my cry, O god; attend unto my prayer.

61:2 from the end of the earth will I cri unto thee, when my heart is
overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than i.

61:3 for thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the
enemy.

61:4 I will abid in thi tabernacl for ever: I will trust in the
covert of thi wings. selah.

61:5 for thou, O god, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the
heritag of those that fear thi name.

61:6 thou wilt prolong the king' life: and hi year as many
generations.

61:7 He shall abid befor god for ever: O prepar merci and truth,
which may preserv him.

61:8 So will I sing prais unto thi name for ever, that I may daily
perform my vows.



62:1 truli my soul waiteth upon god: from him cometh my salvation.

62:2 He onli is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall
not be greatli moved.

62:3 how long will ye imagin mischief against a man? ye shall be
slain all of you: as a bow wall shall ye be, and as a tottering
fence.

62:4 they onli consult to cast him down from hi excellency: they
delight in lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curs inwardly.
selah.

62:5 My soul, wait thou onli upon god; for my expect is from him.

62:6 He onli is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; I shall
not be moved.

62:7 In god is my salvat and my glory: the rock of my strength, and
mi refuge, is in god.

62:8 trust in him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before
him: god is a refug for us. selah.

62:9 sure men of low degre are vanity, and men of high degre are a
lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogeth lighter than
vanity.

62:10 trust not in oppression, and becom not vain in robbery: if
rich increase, set not your heart upon them.

62:11 god hath spoken once; twice have I heard this; that power
belongeth unto god.

62:12 also unto thee, O lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to
everi man accord to hi work.



63:1 O god, thou art my god; earli will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth
for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dri and thirsti land, where
no water is;

63:2 To see thi power and thi glory, so as I have seen thee in the
sanctuary.

63:3 becaus thi lovingkind is better than life, my lip shall
prais thee.

63:4 thu will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up my hand in
thi name.

63:5 My soul shall be satisfi as with marrow and fatness; and my
mouth shall prais thee with joy lips:

63:6 when I rememb thee upon my bed, and medit on thee in the
night watches.

63:7 becaus thou hast been my help, therefor in the shadow of thy
w will I rejoice.

63:8 My soul followeth hard after thee: thi right hand upholdeth me.

63:9 but those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the
low part of the earth.

63:10 they shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes.

63:11 but the king shall rejoic in god; everi one that sweareth by
him shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lie shall be
stopped.



64:1 hear my voice, O god, in my prayer: preserv my life from fear of
th enemy.

64:2 hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the
insurrect of the worker of iniquity:

64:3 who whet their tongu like a sword, and bend their bow to shoot
their arrows, even bitter words:

64:4 that they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenli do they
shoot at him, and fear not.

64:5 they encourag themselv in an evil matter: they commun of
lay snare privily; they say, who shall see them?

64:6 they search out iniquities; they accomplish a dilig search:
both the inward thought of everi one of them, and the heart, is deep.

64:7 but god shall shoot at them with an arrow; suddenli shall they be
wounded.

64:8 So they shall make their own tongu to fall upon themselves: all
that see them shall flee away.

64:9 and all men shall fear, and shall declar the work of god; for
they shall wise consid of hi doing.

64:10 the righteou shall be glad in the lord, and shall trust in him;
and all the upright in heart shall glory.



65:1 prais waiteth for thee, O god, in sion: and unto thee shall the
vow be performed.

65:2 O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

65:3 iniqu prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou
shalt purg them away.

65:4 bless is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach
unto thee, that he may dwell in thi courts: we shall be satisfi with
th good of thi house, even of thi holi temple.

65:5 By terribl thing in righteous wilt thou answer us, O god of
our salvation; who art the confid of all the end of the earth,
and of them that are afar off upon the sea:

65:6 which by hi strength setteth fast the mountains; be girded
with power:

65:7 which stilleth the nois of the seas, the nois of their waves,
and the tumult of the people.

65:8 they also that dwell in the uttermost part are afraid at thy
tokens: thou makest the outgo of the morn and even to
rejoice.

65:9 thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatli enrichest
it with the river of god, which is full of water: thou preparest them
corn, when thou hast so provid for it.

65:10 thou waterest the ridg thereof abundantly: thou settlest the
furrow thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou blessest the
spring thereof.

65:11 thou crownest the year with thi goodness; and thi path drop
fatness.

65:12 they drop upon the pastur of the wilderness: and the little
hil rejoic on everi side.

65:13 the pastur are cloth with flocks; the valley also are
cov over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.



66:1 make a joy nois unto god, all ye lands:

66:2 sing forth the honour of hi name: make hi prais glorious.

66:3 say unto god, how terribl art thou in thi works! through the
great of thi power shall thine enemi submit themselv unto
thee.

66:4 all the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee; they
shal sing to thi name. selah.

66:5 come and see the work of god: he is terribl in hi do toward
th children of men.

66:6 He turn the sea into dri land: they went through the flood on
foot: there did we rejoic in him.

66:7 He ruleth by hi power for ever; hi eye behold the nations: let
not the rebelli exalt themselves. selah.

66:8 O bless our god, ye people, and make the voic of hi prais to
b heard:

66:9 which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be
moved.

66:10 for thou, O god, hast prove us: thou hast tri us, as silver
i tried.

66:11 thou broughtest us into the net; thou laidst afflict upon our
loins.

66:12 thou hast caus men to ride over our heads; we went through
fir and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy
place.

66:13 I will go into thi hous with burnt offerings: I will pay thee
mi vows,

66:14 which my lip have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was
in trouble.

66:15 I will offer unto thee burnt sacrific of fatlings, with the
incens of rams; I will offer bullock with goats. selah.

66:16 come and hear, all ye that fear god, and I will declar what he
hath done for my soul.

66:17 I cri unto him with my mouth, and he wa extol with my
tongue.

66:18 If I regard iniqu in my heart, the lord will not hear me:

66:19 but verili god hath heard me; he hath attend to the voic of
mi prayer.

66:20 bless be god, which hath not turn away my prayer, nor his
merci from me.



67:1 god be merci unto us, and bless us; and caus hi face to
shin upon us; selah.

67:2 that thi way may be known upon earth, thi save health among all
nations.

67:3 let the peopl prais thee, O god; let all the peopl praise
thee.

67:4 O let the nation be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge
th peopl righteously, and govern the nation upon earth. selah.

67:5 let the peopl prais thee, O god; let all the peopl praise
thee.

67:6 then shall the earth yield her increase; and god, even our own
god, shall bless us.

67:7 god shall bless us; and all the end of the earth shall fear him.



68:1 let god arise, let hi enemi be scattered: let them also that
hat him flee befor him.

68:2 As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth
befor the fire, so let the wick perish at the presenc of god.

68:3 but let the righteou be glad; let them rejoic befor god: yea,
let them exceedingli rejoice.

68:4 sing unto god, sing prais to hi name: extol him that rideth
upon the heaven by hi name jah, and rejoic befor him.

68:5 A father of the fatherless, and a judg of the widows, is god in
hi holi habitation.

68:6 god setteth the solitari in families: he bringeth out those which
ar bound with chains: but the rebelli dwell in a dri land.

68:7 O god, when thou wentest forth befor thi people, when thou didst
march through the wilderness; selah:

68:8 the earth shook, the heaven also drop at the presenc of god:
even sinai itself wa move at the presenc of god, the god of israel.

68:9 thou, O god, didst send a plenti rain, wherebi thou didst
confirm thine inheritance, when it wa weary.

68:10 thi congreg hath dwelt therein: thou, O god, hast prepared
of thi good for the poor.

68:11 the lord gave the word: great wa the compani of those that
publish it.

68:12 king of armi did flee apace: and she that tarri at home
divid the spoil.

68:13 though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings
of a dove cover with silver, and her feather with yellow gold.

68:14 when the almighti scatter king in it, it wa white as snow in
salmon.

68:15 the hill of god is as the hill of bashan; an high hill as the
hil of bashan.

68:16 whi leap ye, ye high hills? thi is the hill which god desireth
to dwell in; yea, the lord will dwell in it for ever.

68:17 the chariot of god are twenti thousand, even thousand of
angels: the lord is among them, as in sinai, in the holi place.

68:18 thou hast ascend on high, thou hast led captiv captive:
th hast receiv gift for men; yea, for the rebelli also, that
th lord god might dwell among them.

68:19 bless be the lord, who daili loadeth us with benefits, even
th god of our salvation. selah.

68:20 He that is our god is the god of salvation; and unto god the
lord belong the issu from death.

68:21 but god shall wound the head of hi enemies, and the hairi scalp
of such an one as goeth on still in hi trespasses.

68:22 the lord said, I will bring again from bashan, I will bring my
peopl again from the depth of the sea:

68:23 that thi foot may be dip in the blood of thine enemies, and
th tongu of thi dog in the same.

68:24 they have seen thi goings, O god; even the go of my god, my
king, in the sanctuary.

68:25 the singer went before, the player on instrument followed
after; among them were the damsel play with timbrels.

68:26 bless ye god in the congregations, even the lord, from the
fountain of israel.

68:27 there is littl benjamin with their ruler, the princ of judah
and their council, the princ of zebulun, and the princ of
naphtali.

68:28 thi god hath command thi strength: strengthen, O god, that
which thou hast wrought for us.

68:29 becaus of thi templ at jerusalem shall king bring presents
unto thee.

68:30 rebuk the compani of spearmen, the multitud of the bulls, with
th calv of the people, till everi one submit himself with piec of
silver: scatter thou the peopl that delight in war.

68:31 princ shall come out of egypt; ethiopia shall soon stretch out
her hand unto god.

68:32 sing unto god, ye kingdom of the earth; O sing prais unto the
lord; selah:

68:33 To him that rideth upon the heaven of heavens, which were of
old; lo, he doth send out hi voice, and that a mighti voice.

68:34 ascrib ye strength unto god: hi excel is over israel, and
hi strength is in the clouds.

68:35 O god, thou art terribl out of thi holi places: the god of
israel is he that giveth strength and power unto hi people. blessed
b god.



69:1 save me, O god; for the water are come in unto my soul.

69:2 I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into
deep waters, where the flood overflow me.

69:3 I am weari of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eye fail while
i wait for my god.

69:4 they that hate me without a caus are more than the hair of mine
head: they that would destroy me, be mine enemi wrongfully, are
mighty: then I restor that which I took not away.

69:5 O god, thou knowest my foolishness; and my sin are not hid from
thee.

69:6 let not them that wait on thee, O lord god of hosts, be ashamed
for my sake: let not those that seek thee be confound for my sake, o
god of israel.

69:7 becaus for thi sake I have born reproach; shame hath cover my
face.

69:8 I am becom a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my
mother' children.

69:9 for the zeal of thine hous hath eaten me up; and the reproaches
of them that reproach thee are fallen upon me.

69:10 when I wept, and chasten my soul with fasting, that wa to my
reproach.

69:11 I made sackcloth also my garment; and I becam a proverb to
them.

69:12 they that sit in the gate speak against me; and I wa the song
of the drunkards.

69:13 but as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O lord, in an acceptable
time: O god, in the multitud of thi merci hear me, in the truth of
thi salvation.

69:14 deliv me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be
deliv from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

69:15 let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow
m up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

69:16 hear me, O lord; for thi lovingkind is good: turn unto me
accord to the multitud of thi tender mercies.

69:17 and hide not thi face from thi servant; for I am in trouble:
hear me speedily.

69:18 draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliv me becaus of
min enemies.

69:19 thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour:
min adversari are all befor thee.

69:20 reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness: and i
look for some to take pity, but there wa none; and for comforters,
but I found none.

69:21 they gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave
m vinegar to drink.

69:22 let their tabl becom a snare befor them: and that which
should have been for their welfare, let it becom a trap.

69:23 let their eye be darkened, that they see not; and make their
loin continu to shake.

69:24 pour out thine indign upon them, and let thi wrath anger
tak hold of them.

69:25 let their habit be desolate; and let none dwell in their
tents.

69:26 for they persecut him whom thou hast smitten; and they talk to
th grief of those whom thou hast wounded.

69:27 add iniqu unto their iniquity: and let them not come into thy
righteousness.

69:28 let them be blot out of the book of the living, and not be
written with the righteous.

69:29 but I am poor and sorrowful: let thi salvation, O god, set me up
on high.

69:30 I will prais the name of god with a song, and will magnifi him
with thanksgiving.

69:31 thi also shall pleas the lord better than an ox or bullock
that hath horn and hoofs.

69:32 the humbl shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall
liv that seek god.

69:33 for the lord heareth the poor, and despiseth not hi prisoners.

69:34 let the heaven and earth prais him, the seas, and everi thing
that moveth therein.

69:35 for god will save zion, and will build the citi of judah: that
they may dwell there, and have it in possession.

69:36 the seed also of hi servant shall inherit it: and they that
lov hi name shall dwell therein.



70:1 make haste, O god, to deliv me; make hast to help me, O lord.

70:2 let them be asham and confound that seek after my soul: let
them be turn backward, and put to confusion, that desir my hurt.

70:3 let them be turn back for a reward of their shame that say,
aha, aha.

70:4 let all those that seek thee rejoic and be glad in thee: and let
such as love thi salvat say continually, let god be magnified.

70:5 but I am poor and needy: make hast unto me, O god: thou art my
help and my deliverer; O lord, make no tarrying.



71:1 In thee, O lord, do I put my trust: let me never be put to
confusion.

71:2 deliv me in thi righteousness, and caus me to escape: incline
thin ear unto me, and save me.

71:3 Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continu resort:
th hast given command to save me; for thou art my rock and my
fortress.

71:4 deliv me, O my god, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the
hand of the unright and cruel man.

71:5 for thou art my hope, O lord god: thou art my trust from my
youth.

71:6 By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that
took me out of my mother' bowels: my prais shall be continu of
thee.

71:7 I am as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge.

71:8 let my mouth be fill with thi prais and with thi honour all
th day.

71:9 cast me not off in the time of old age; forsak me not when my
strength faileth.

71:10 for mine enemi speak against me; and they that lay wait for my
soul take counsel together,

71:11 saying, god hath forsaken him: persecut and take him; for there
i none to deliv him.

71:12 O god, be not far from me: O my god, make hast for my help.

71:13 let them be confound and consum that are adversari to my
soul; let them be cover with reproach and dishonour that seek my
hurt.

71:14 but I will hope continually, and will yet prais thee more and
more.

71:15 My mouth shall shew forth thi righteous and thi salvation
al the day; for I know not the number thereof.

71:16 I will go in the strength of the lord god: I will make mention
of thi righteousness, even of thine only.

71:17 O god, thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have i
declar thi wondrou works.

71:18 now also when I am old and greyheaded, O god, forsak me not;
until I have shew thi strength unto thi generation, and thi power
to everi one that is to come.

71:19 thi righteous also, O god, is veri high, who hast done great
things: O god, who is like unto thee!

71:20 thou, which hast shew me great and sore troubles, shalt
quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the depth of the
earth.

71:21 thou shalt increas my greatness, and comfort me on everi side.

71:22 I will also prais thee with the psaltery, even thi truth, O my
god: unto thee will I sing with the harp, O thou holi one of israel.

71:23 My lip shall greatli rejoic when I sing unto thee; and my
soul, which thou hast redeemed.

71:24 My tongu also shall talk of thi righteous all the day long:
for they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my
hurt.



72:1 give the king thi judgments, O god, and thi righteous unto
th king' son.

72:2 He shall judg thi peopl with righteousness, and thi poor with
judgment.

72:3 the mountain shall bring peac to the people, and the little
hills, by righteousness.

72:4 He shall judg the poor of the people, he shall save the children
of the needy, and shall break in piec the oppressor.

72:5 they shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure,
throughout all generations.

72:6 He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as shower that
wat the earth.

72:7 In hi day shall the righteou flourish; and abund of peace
so long as the moon endureth.

72:8 He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river
unto the end of the earth.

72:9 they that dwell in the wilder shall bow befor him; and his
enemi shall lick the dust.

72:10 the king of tarshish and of the isl shall bring presents: the
k of sheba and seba shall offer gifts.

72:11 yea, all king shall fall down befor him: all nation shall
serv him.

72:12 for he shall deliv the needi when he crieth; the poor also,
and him that hath no helper.

72:13 He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the soul of
th needy.

72:14 He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and
preci shall their blood be in hi sight.

72:15 and he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of
sheba: prayer also shall be made for him continually; and daili shall
h be praised.

72:16 there shall be an hand of corn in the earth upon the top of
th mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like lebanon: and they of
th citi shall flourish like grass of the earth.

72:17 hi name shall endur for ever: hi name shall be continu as
long as the sun: and men shall be bless in him: all nation shall
cal him blessed.

72:18 bless be the lord god, the god of israel, who onli doeth
wondr things.

72:19 and bless be hi gloriou name for ever: and let the whole
earth be fill with hi glory; amen, and amen.

72:20 the prayer of david the son of jess are ended.



73:1 truli god is good to israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart.

73:2 but as for me, my feet were almost gone; my step had well nigh
slipped.

73:3 for I wa enviou at the foolish, when I saw the prosper of
th wicked.

73:4 for there are no band in their death: but their strength is
firm.

73:5 they are not in troubl as other men; neither are they plagued
lik other men.

73:6 therefor pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence
covereth them as a garment.

73:7 their eye stand out with fatness: they have more than heart
could wish.

73:8 they are corrupt, and speak wickedli concern oppression: they
speak loftily.

73:9 they set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue
walketh through the earth.

73:10 therefor hi peopl return hither: and water of a full cup are
wrung out to them.

73:11 and they say, how doth god know? and is there knowledg in the
most high?

73:12 behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they
increas in riches.

73:13 verili I have cleans my heart in vain, and wash my hand in
innocency.

73:14 for all the day long have I been plagued, and chasten every
morning.

73:15 If I say, I will speak thus; behold, I should offend against the
gener of thi children.

73:16 when I thought to know this, it wa too pain for me;

73:17 until I went into the sanctuari of god; then understood I their
end.

73:18 sure thou didst set them in slipperi places: thou castedst
them down into destruction.

73:19 how are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they are
utterli consum with terrors.

73:20 As a dream when one awaketh; so, O lord, when thou awakest, thou
shalt despis their image.

73:21 thu my heart wa grieved, and I wa prick in my reins.

73:22 So foolish wa I, and ignorant: I wa as a beast befor thee.

73:23 nevertheless I am continu with thee: thou hast holden me by
mi right hand.

73:24 thou shalt guid me with thi counsel, and afterward receiv me
to glory.

73:25 whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desir besid thee.

73:26 My flesh and my heart faileth: but god is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

73:27 for, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: thou hast
destroy all them that go a whore from thee.

73:28 but it is good for me to draw near to god: I have put my trust
in the lord god, that I may declar all thi works.



74:1 O god, whi hast thou cast us off for ever? whi doth thine anger
smok against the sheep of thi pasture?

74:2 rememb thi congregation, which thou hast purchas of old; the
rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed; thi mount zion,
wherein thou hast dwelt.

74:3 lift up thi feet unto the perpetu desolations; even all that
th enemi hath done wickedli in the sanctuary.

74:4 thine enemi roar in the midst of thi congregations; they set up
their ensign for signs.

74:5 A man wa famou accord as he had lift up axe upon the
thick trees.

74:6 but now they break down the carv work thereof at onc with axes
and hammers.

74:7 they have cast fire into thi sanctuary, they have defil by
cast down the dwell place of thi name to the ground.

74:8 they said in their hearts, let us destroy them together: they
hav burn up all the synagogu of god in the land.

74:9 We see not our signs: there is no more ani prophet: neither is
ther among us ani that knoweth how long.

74:10 O god, how long shall the adversari reproach? shall the enemy
blasphem thi name for ever?

74:11 whi withdrawest thou thi hand, even thi right hand? pluck it out
of thi bosom.

74:12 for god is my king of old, work salvat in the midst of the
earth.

74:13 thou didst divid the sea by thi strength: thou brakest the
head of the dragon in the waters.

74:14 thou brakest the head of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to
b meat to the peopl inhabit the wilderness.

74:15 thou didst cleav the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up
mighti rivers.

74:16 the day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared
th light and the sun.

74:17 thou hast set all the border of the earth: thou hast made
summ and winter.

74:18 rememb this, that the enemi hath reproached, O lord, and that
th foolish peopl have blasphem thi name.

74:19 O deliv not the soul of thi turtledov unto the multitud of
th wicked: forget not the congreg of thi poor for ever.

74:20 have respect unto the covenant: for the dark place of the earth
ar full of the habit of cruelty.

74:21 O let not the oppress return ashamed: let the poor and needy
prais thi name.

74:22 arise, O god, plead thine own cause: rememb how the foolish
man reproacheth thee daily.

74:23 forget not the voic of thine enemies: the tumult of those that
ris up against thee increaseth continually.



75:1 unto thee, O god, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks:
for that thi name is near thi wondrou work declare.

75:2 when I shall receiv the congreg I will judg uprightly.

75:3 the earth and all the inhabit thereof are dissolved: I bear
up the pillar of it. selah.

75:4 I said unto the fools, deal not foolishly: and to the wicked,
lift not up the horn:

75:5 lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.

75:6 for promot cometh neither from the east, nor from the west,
nor from the south.

75:7 but god is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up
another.

75:8 for in the hand of the lord there is a cup, and the wine is red;
it is full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs
thereof, all the wick of the earth shall wring them out, and drink
them.

75:9 but I will declar for ever; I will sing prais to the god of
jacob.

75:10 all the horn of the wick also will I cut off; but the horns
of the righteou shall be exalted.



76:1 In judah is god known: hi name is great in israel.

76:2 In salem also is hi tabernacle, and hi dwell place in zion.

76:3 there brake he the arrow of the bow, the shield, and the sword,
and the battle. selah.

76:4 thou art more gloriou and excel than the mountain of prey.

76:5 the stoutheart are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and
non of the men of might have found their hands.

76:6 At thi rebuke, O god of jacob, both the chariot and hors are
cast into a dead sleep.

76:7 thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thi sight
when onc thou art angry?

76:8 thou didst caus judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth
feared, and wa still,

76:9 when god aros to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth.
selah.

76:10 sure the wrath of man shall prais thee: the remaind of
wrath shalt thou restrain.

76:11 vow, and pay unto the lord your god: let all that be round about
him bring present unto him that ought to be feared.

76:12 He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terribl to the
k of the earth.



77:1 I cri unto god with my voice, even unto god with my voice; and
h gave ear unto me.

77:2 In the day of my troubl I sought the lord: my sore ran in the
night, and ceas not: my soul refus to be comforted.

77:3 I rememb god, and wa troubled: I complained, and my spirit
wa overwhelmed. selah.

77:4 thou holdest mine eye waking: I am so troubl that I cannot
speak.

77:5 I have consid the day of old, the year of ancient times.

77:6 I call to remembr my song in the night: I commun with mine
own heart: and my spirit made dilig search.

77:7 will the lord cast off for ever? and will he be favour no
more?

77:8 Is hi merci clean gone for ever? doth hi promis fail for
evermore?

77:9 hath god forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his
tend mercies? selah.

77:10 and I said, thi is my infirmity: but I will rememb the years
of the right hand of the most high.

77:11 I will rememb the work of the lord: sure I will remember
thi wonder of old.

77:12 I will medit also of all thi work, and talk of thi doings.

77:13 thi way, O god, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as
our god?

77:14 thou art the god that doest wonders: thou hast declar thy
strength among the people.

77:15 thou hast with thine arm redeem thi people, the son of jacob
and joseph. selah.

77:16 the water saw thee, O god, the water saw thee; they were
afraid: the depth also were troubled.

77:17 the cloud pour out water: the sky sent out a sound: thine
arrow also went abroad.

77:18 the voic of thi thunder wa in the heaven: the lightnings
lighten the world: the earth trembl and shook.

77:19 thi way is in the sea, and thi path in the great waters, and thy
footstep are not known.

77:20 thou leddest thi peopl like a flock by the hand of mose and
aaron.



78:1 give ear, O my people, to my law: inclin your ear to the words
of my mouth.

78:2 I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark say of
old:

78:3 which we have heard and known, and our father have told us.

78:4 We will not hide them from their children, shew to the
gener to come the prais of the lord, and hi strength, and his
wond work that he hath done.

78:5 for he establish a testimoni in jacob, and appoint a law in
israel, which he command our fathers, that they should make them
known to their children:

78:6 that the gener to come might know them, even the children
which should be born; who should aris and declar them to their
children:

78:7 that they might set their hope in god, and not forget the works
of god, but keep hi commandments:

78:8 and might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious
generation; a gener that set not their heart aright, and whose
spirit wa not stedfast with god.

78:9 the children of ephraim, be armed, and carri bows, turned
back in the day of battle.

78:10 they kept not the coven of god, and refus to walk in his
law;

78:11 and forgat hi works, and hi wonder that he had shew them.

78:12 marvel thing did he in the sight of their fathers, in the
land of egypt, in the field of zoan.

78:13 He divid the sea, and caus them to pass through; and he made
th water to stand as an heap.

78:14 In the daytim also he led them with a cloud, and all the night
with a light of fire.

78:15 He clave the rock in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out
of the great depths.

78:16 He brought stream also out of the rock, and caus water to
run down like rivers.

78:17 and they sin yet more against him by provok the most high
in the wilderness.

78:18 and they tempt god in their heart by ask meat for their
lust.

78:19 yea, they spake against god; they said, can god furnish a table
in the wilderness?

78:20 behold, he smote the rock, that the water gush out, and the
stream overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provid flesh for
hi people?

78:21 therefor the lord heard this, and wa wroth: so a fire was
kindl against jacob, and anger also came up against israel;

78:22 becaus they believ not in god, and trust not in his
salvation:

78:23 though he had command the cloud from above, and open the
door of heaven,

78:24 and had rain down manna upon them to eat, and had given them
of the corn of heaven.

78:25 man did eat angels' food: he sent them meat to the full.

78:26 He caus an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by hi power
h brought in the south wind.

78:27 He rain flesh also upon them as dust, and feather fowl like
a the sand of the sea:

78:28 and he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their
habitations.

78:29 So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their
own desire;

78:30 they were not estrang from their lust. but while their meat
wa yet in their mouths,

78:31 the wrath of god came upon them, and slew the fattest of them,
and smote down the chosen men of israel.

78:32 for all thi they sin still, and believ not for his
wondr works.

78:33 therefor their day did he consum in vanity, and their years
in trouble.

78:34 when he slew them, then they sought him: and they return and
enquir earli after god.

78:35 and they rememb that god wa their rock, and the high god
their redeemer.

78:36 nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they
li unto him with their tongues.

78:37 for their heart wa not right with him, neither were they
stedfast in hi covenant.

78:38 but he, be full of compassion, forgav their iniquity, and
destroy them not: yea, mani a time turn he hi anger away, and did
not stir up all hi wrath.

78:39 for he rememb that they were but flesh; a wind that passeth
away, and cometh not again.

78:40 how oft did they provok him in the wilderness, and griev him
in the desert!

78:41 yea, they turn back and tempt god, and limit the holi one
of israel.

78:42 they rememb not hi hand, nor the day when he deliv them
from the enemy.

78:43 how he had wrought hi sign in egypt, and hi wonder in the
field of zoan.

78:44 and had turn their river into blood; and their floods, that
they could not drink.

78:45 He sent diver sort of fli among them, which devour them;
and frogs, which destroy them.

78:46 He gave also their increas unto the caterpiller, and their
labour unto the locust.

78:47 He destroy their vine with hail, and their sycomor trees
with frost.

78:48 He gave up their cattl also to the hail, and their flock to
hot thunderbolts.

78:49 He cast upon them the fierc of hi anger, wrath, and
indignation, and trouble, by send evil angel among them.

78:50 He made a way to hi anger; he spare not their soul from death,
but gave their life over to the pestilence;

78:51 and smote all the firstborn in egypt; the chief of their
strength in the tabernacl of ham:

78:52 but made hi own peopl to go forth like sheep, and guid them
in the wilder like a flock.

78:53 and he led them on safely, so that they fear not: but the sea
overwhelm their enemies.

78:54 and he brought them to the border of hi sanctuary, even to this
mountain, which hi right hand had purchased.

78:55 He cast out the heathen also befor them, and divid them an
inherit by line, and made the tribe of israel to dwell in their
tents.

78:56 yet they tempt and provok the most high god, and kept not
hi testimonies:

78:57 but turn back, and dealt unfaith like their fathers: they
wer turn asid like a deceit bow.

78:58 for they provok him to anger with their high places, and moved
him to jealousi with their graven images.

78:59 when god heard this, he wa wroth, and greatli abhor israel:

78:60 So that he forsook the tabernacl of shiloh, the tent which he
plac among men;

78:61 and deliv hi strength into captivity, and hi glori into
th enemy' hand.

78:62 He gave hi peopl over also unto the sword; and wa wroth with
hi inheritance.

78:63 the fire consum their young men; and their maiden were not
given to marriage.

78:64 their priest fell by the sword; and their widow made no
lamentation.

78:65 then the lord awak as one out of sleep, and like a mighti man
that shouteth by reason of wine.

78:66 and he smote hi enemi in the hinder parts: he put them to a
perpetu reproach.

78:67 moreov he refus the tabernacl of joseph, and chose not the
trib of ephraim:

78:68 but chose the tribe of judah, the mount zion which he loved.

78:69 and he built hi sanctuari like high palaces, like the earth
which he hath establish for ever.

78:70 He chose david also hi servant, and took him from the
sheepfolds:

78:71 from follow the ewe great with young he brought him to feed
jacob hi people, and israel hi inheritance.

78:72 So he fed them accord to the integr of hi heart; and
guid them by the skil of hi hands.



79:1 O god, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thi holy
templ have they defiled; they have laid jerusalem on heaps.

79:2 the dead bodi of thi servant have they given to be meat unto
th fowl of the heaven, the flesh of thi saint unto the beast of
th earth.

79:3 their blood have they shed like water round about jerusalem; and
ther wa none to buri them.

79:4 We are becom a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision
to them that are round about us.

79:5 how long, lord? wilt thou be angri for ever? shall thi jealousy
burn like fire?

79:6 pour out thi wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the kingdom that have not call upon thi name.

79:7 for they have devour jacob, and laid wast hi dwell place.

79:8 O rememb not against us former iniquities: let thi tender
merci speedili prevent us: for we are brought veri low.

79:9 help us, O god of our salvation, for the glori of thi name: and
deliv us, and purg away our sins, for thi name' sake.

79:10 wherefor should the heathen say, where is their god? let him be
known among the heathen in our sight by the reveng of the blood of
thi servant which is shed.

79:11 let the sigh of the prison come befor thee; accord to
th great of thi power preserv thou those that are appoint to
die;

79:12 and render unto our neighbour sevenfold into their bosom their
reproach, wherewith they have reproach thee, O lord.

79:13 So we thi peopl and sheep of thi pastur will give thee thanks
for ever: we will shew forth thi prais to all generations.



80:1 give ear, O shepherd of israel, thou that leadest joseph like a
flock; thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth.

80:2 befor ephraim and benjamin and manasseh stir up thi strength,
and come and save us.

80:3 turn us again, O god, and caus thi face to shine; and we shall
b saved.

80:4 O lord god of hosts, how long wilt thou be angri against the
pray of thi people?

80:5 thou feedest them with the bread of tears; and givest them tears
to drink in great measure.

80:6 thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies
laugh among themselves.

80:7 turn us again, O god of hosts, and caus thi face to shine; and
w shall be saved.

80:8 thou hast brought a vine out of egypt: thou hast cast out the
heathen, and plant it.

80:9 thou preparedst room befor it, and didst caus it to take deep
root, and it fill the land.

80:10 the hill were cover with the shadow of it, and the boughs
thereof were like the goodli cedars.

80:11 she sent out her bough unto the sea, and her branch unto the
river.

80:12 whi hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they
which pass by the way do pluck her?

80:13 the boar out of the wood doth wast it, and the wild beast of
th field doth devour it.

80:14 return, we beseech thee, O god of hosts: look down from heaven,
and behold, and visit thi vine;

80:15 and the vineyard which thi right hand hath planted, and the
branch that thou madest strong for thyself.

80:16 It is burn with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the
rebuk of thi countenance.

80:17 let thi hand be upon the man of thi right hand, upon the son of
man whom thou madest strong for thyself.

80:18 So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call
upon thi name.

80:19 turn us again, O lord god of hosts, caus thi face to shine; and
w shall be saved.



81:1 sing aloud unto god our strength: make a joy nois unto the
god of jacob.

81:2 take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp
with the psaltery.

81:3 blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on
our solemn feast day.

81:4 for thi wa a statut for israel, and a law of the god of jacob.

81:5 thi he ordain in joseph for a testimony, when he went out
through the land of egypt: where I heard a languag that I understood
not.

81:6 I remov hi shoulder from the burden: hi hand were delivered
from the pots.

81:7 thou calledst in trouble, and I deliv thee; I answer thee
in the secret place of thunder: I prove thee at the water of
meribah.

selah.

81:8 hear, O my people, and I will testifi unto thee: O israel, if
thou wilt hearken unto me;

81:9 there shall no strang god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship
ani strang god.

81:10 I am the lord thi god, which brought thee out of the land of
egypt: open thi mouth wide, and I will fill it.

81:11 but my peopl would not hearken to my voice; and israel would
non of me.

81:12 So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust: and they walked
in their own counsels.

81:13 Oh that my peopl had hearken unto me, and israel had walked
in my ways!

81:14 I should soon have subdu their enemies, and turn my hand
against their adversaries.

81:15 the hater of the lord should have submit themselv unto
him: but their time should have endur for ever.

81:16 He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and
with honey out of the rock should I have satisfi thee.



82:1 god standeth in the congreg of the mighty; he judgeth among
th gods.

82:2 how long will ye judg unjustly, and accept the person of the
wicked? selah.

82:3 defend the poor and fatherless: do justic to the afflict and
needy.

82:4 deliv the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the
wicked.

82:5 they know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in
darkness: all the foundat of the earth are out of course.

82:6 I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most
high.

82:7 but ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.

82:8 arise, O god, judg the earth: for thou shalt inherit all
nations.



83:1 keep not thou silence, O god: hold not thi peace, and be not
still, O god.

83:2 for, lo, thine enemi make a tumult: and they that hate thee
hav lift up the head.

83:3 they have taken crafti counsel against thi people, and consulted
against thi hidden ones.

83:4 they have said, come, and let us cut them off from be a
nation; that the name of israel may be no more in remembrance.

83:5 for they have consult togeth with one consent: they are
confeder against thee:

83:6 the tabernacl of edom, and the ishmaelites; of moab, and the
hagarenes;

83:7 gebal, and ammon, and amalek; the philistin with the
inhabit of tyre;

83:8 assur also is join with them: they have holpen the children of
lot.

selah.

83:9 Do unto them as unto the midianites; as to sisera, as to jabin,
at the brook of kison:

83:10 which perish at endor: they becam as dung for the earth.

83:11 make their nobl like oreb, and like zeeb: yea, all their
princ as zebah, and as zalmunna:

83:12 who said, let us take to ourselv the hous of god in
possession.

83:13 O my god, make them like a wheel; as the stubbl befor the
wind.

83:14 As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the
mountain on fire;

83:15 So persecut them with thi tempest, and make them afraid with
thi storm.

83:16 fill their face with shame; that they may seek thi name, o
lord.

83:17 let them be confound and troubl for ever; yea, let them be
put to shame, and perish:

83:18 that men may know that thou, whose name alon is jehovah, art
th most high over all the earth.



84:1 how amiabl are thi tabernacles, O lord of hosts!

84:2 My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the court of the lord:
mi heart and my flesh crieth out for the live god.

84:3 yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for
herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O lord of
hosts, my king, and my god.

84:4 bless are they that dwell in thi house: they will be still
prais thee. selah.

84:5 bless is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are
th way of them.

84:6 who pass through the valley of baca make it a well; the rain
also filleth the pools.

84:7 they go from strength to strength, everi one of them in zion
appeareth befor god.

84:8 O lord god of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O god of jacob.
selah.

84:9 behold, O god our shield, and look upon the face of thine
anointed.

84:10 for a day in thi court is better than a thousand. I had rather
b a doorkeep in the hous of my god, than to dwell in the tent of
wickedness.

84:11 for the lord god is a sun and shield: the lord will give grace
and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly.

84:12 O lord of hosts, bless is the man that trusteth in thee.



85:1 lord, thou hast been favour unto thi land: thou hast brought
back the captiv of jacob.

85:2 thou hast forgiven the iniqu of thi people, thou hast covered
al their sin. selah.

85:3 thou hast taken away all thi wrath: thou hast turn thyself from
th fierc of thine anger.

85:4 turn us, O god of our salvation, and caus thine anger toward us
to cease.

85:5 wilt thou be angri with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine
ang to all generations?

85:6 wilt thou not reviv us again: that thi peopl may rejoic in
thee?

85:7 shew us thi mercy, O lord, and grant us thi salvation.

85:8 I will hear what god the lord will speak: for he will speak peace
unto hi people, and to hi saints: but let them not turn again to
folly.

85:9 sure hi salvat is nigh them that fear him; that glori may
dwel in our land.

85:10 merci and truth are met together; righteous and peac have
kiss each other.

85:11 truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteous shall
look down from heaven.

85:12 yea, the lord shall give that which is good; and our land shall
yield her increase.

85:13 righteous shall go befor him; and shall set us in the way
of hi steps.



86:1 bow down thine ear, O lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy.

86:2 preserv my soul; for I am holy: O thou my god, save thi servant
that trusteth in thee.

86:3 Be merci unto me, O lord: for I cri unto thee daily.

86:4 rejoic the soul of thi servant: for unto thee, O lord, do I lift
up my soul.

86:5 for thou, lord, art good, and readi to forgive; and plenteou in
merci unto all them that call upon thee.

86:6 give ear, O lord, unto my prayer; and attend to the voic of my
supplications.

86:7 In the day of my troubl I will call upon thee: for thou wilt
answ me.

86:8 among the god there is none like unto thee, O lord; neither are
ther ani work like unto thi works.

86:9 all nation whom thou hast made shall come and worship before
thee, O lord; and shall glorifi thi name.

86:10 for thou art great, and doest wondrou things: thou art god
alone.

86:11 teach me thi way, O lord; I will walk in thi truth: unit my
heart to fear thi name.

86:12 I will prais thee, O lord my god, with all my heart: and I will
glorifi thi name for evermore.

86:13 for great is thi merci toward me: and thou hast deliv my
soul from the lowest hell.

86:14 O god, the proud are risen against me, and the assembl of
viol men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before
them.

86:15 but thou, O lord, art a god full of compassion, and gracious,
long suffering, and plenteou in merci and truth.

86:16 O turn unto me, and have merci upon me; give thi strength unto
thi servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.

86:17 shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it,
and be ashamed: becaus thou, lord, hast holpen me, and comfort me.



87:1 hi foundat is in the holi mountains.

87:2 the lord loveth the gate of zion more than all the dwell of
jacob.

87:3 gloriou thing are spoken of thee, O citi of god. selah.

87:4 I will make mention of rahab and babylon to them that know me:
behold philistia, and tyre, with ethiopia; thi man wa born there.

87:5 and of zion it shall be said, thi and that man wa born in her:
and the highest himself shall establish her.

87:6 the lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this
man wa born there. selah.

87:7 As well the singer as the player on instrument shall be there:
al my spring are in thee.



88:1 O lord god of my salvation, I have cri day and night before
thee:

88:2 let my prayer come befor thee: inclin thine ear unto my cry;

88:3 for my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto
th grave.

88:4 I am count with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man
that hath no strength:

88:5 free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom
thou rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thi hand.

88:6 thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.

88:7 thi wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflict me with all
thi waves. selah.

88:8 thou hast put away mine acquaint far from me; thou hast made
m an abomin unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.

88:9 mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction: lord, I have called
daili upon thee, I have stretch out my hand unto thee.

88:10 wilt thou shew wonder to the dead? shall the dead aris and
prais thee? selah.

88:11 shall thi lovingkind be declar in the grave? or thy
faith in destruction?

88:12 shall thi wonder be known in the dark? and thi righteous in
th land of forgetfulness?

88:13 but unto thee have I cried, O lord; and in the morn shall my
pray prevent thee.

88:14 lord, whi castest thou off my soul? whi hidest thou thi face
from me?

88:15 I am afflict and readi to die from my youth up: while I suffer
thi terror I am distracted.

88:16 thi fierc wrath goeth over me; thi terror have cut me off.

88:17 they came round about me daili like water; they compass me
about together.

88:18 lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine
acquaint into darkness.



89:1 I will sing of the merci of the lord for ever: with my mouth
wil I make known thi faith to all generations.

89:2 for I have said, merci shall be built up for ever: thy
faith shalt thou establish in the veri heavens.

89:3 I have made a coven with my chosen, I have sworn unto david my
servant,

89:4 thi seed will I establish for ever, and build up thi throne to
al generations. selah.

89:5 and the heaven shall prais thi wonders, O lord: thy
faith also in the congreg of the saints.

89:6 for who in the heaven can be compar unto the lord? who among
th son of the mighti can be liken unto the lord?

89:7 god is greatli to be fear in the assembl of the saints, and to
b had in rever of all them that are about him.

89:8 O lord god of hosts, who is a strong lord like unto thee? or to
thi faith round about thee?

89:9 thou rulest the rage of the sea: when the wave thereof arise,
th stillest them.

89:10 thou hast broken rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou
hast scatter thine enemi with thi strong arm.

89:11 the heaven are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world
and the ful thereof, thou hast found them.

89:12 the north and the south thou hast creat them: tabor and hermon
shal rejoic in thi name.

89:13 thou hast a mighti arm: strong is thi hand, and high is thy
right hand.

89:14 justic and judgment are the habit of thi throne: merci and
truth shall go befor thi face.

89:15 bless is the peopl that know the joy sound: they shall
walk, O lord, in the light of thi countenance.

89:16 In thi name shall they rejoic all the day: and in thy
right shall they be exalted.

89:17 for thou art the glori of their strength: and in thi favour our
horn shall be exalted.

89:18 for the lord is our defence; and the holi one of israel is our
king.

89:19 then thou spakest in vision to thi holi one, and saidst, I have
laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalt one chosen out of
th people.

89:20 I have found david my servant; with my holi oil have I anointed
him:

89:21 with whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
strengthen him.

89:22 the enemi shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness
afflict him.

89:23 and I will beat down hi foe befor hi face, and plagu them
that hate him.

89:24 but my faith and my merci shall be with him: and in my
nam shall hi horn be exalted.

89:25 I will set hi hand also in the sea, and hi right hand in the
rivers.

89:26 He shall cri unto me, thou art my father, my god, and the rock
of my salvation.

89:27 also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the king of the
earth.

89:28 My merci will I keep for him for evermore, and my coven shall
stand fast with him.

89:29 hi seed also will I make to endur for ever, and hi throne as
th day of heaven.

89:30 If hi children forsak my law, and walk not in my judgments;

89:31 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

89:32 then will I visit their transgress with the rod, and their
iniqu with stripes.

89:33 nevertheless my lovingkind will I not utterli take from him,
nor suffer my faith to fail.

89:34 My coven will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my lips.

89:35 onc have I sworn by my holi that I will not lie unto david.

89:36 hi seed shall endur for ever, and hi throne as the sun before
me.

89:37 It shall be establish for ever as the moon, and as a faithful
wit in heaven. selah.

89:38 but thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with
thin anointed.

89:39 thou hast made void the coven of thi servant: thou hast
profan hi crown by cast it to the ground.

89:40 thou hast broken down all hi hedges; thou hast brought his
strong hold to ruin.

89:41 all that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his
neighbours.

89:42 thou hast set up the right hand of hi adversaries; thou hast
mad all hi enemi to rejoice.

89:43 thou hast also turn the edg of hi sword, and hast not made
him to stand in the battle.

89:44 thou hast made hi glori to cease, and cast hi throne down to
th ground.

89:45 the day of hi youth hast thou shortened: thou hast cover him
with shame. selah.

89:46 how long, lord? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thi wrath
burn like fire?

89:47 rememb how short my time is: wherefor hast thou made all men
in vain?

89:48 what man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he
deliv hi soul from the hand of the grave? selah.

89:49 lord, where are thi former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest
unto david in thi truth?

89:50 remember, lord, the reproach of thi servants; how I do bear in
mi bosom the reproach of all the mighti people;

89:51 wherewith thine enemi have reproached, O lord; wherewith they
hav reproach the footstep of thine anointed.

89:52 bless be the lord for evermore. amen, and amen.



90:1 lord, thou hast been our dwell place in all generations.

90:2 befor the mountain were brought forth, or ever thou hadst
form the earth and the world, even from everlast to everlasting,
th art god.

90:3 thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, return, ye children
of men.

90:4 for a thousand year in thi sight are but as yesterday when it is
past, and as a watch in the night.

90:5 thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in
th morn they are like grass which groweth up.

90:6 In the morn it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the even it
i cut down, and withereth.

90:7 for we are consum by thine anger, and by thi wrath are we
troubled.

90:8 thou hast set our iniqu befor thee, our secret sin in the
light of thi countenance.

90:9 for all our day are pass away in thi wrath: we spend our years
a a tale that is told.

90:10 the day of our year are threescor year and ten; and if by
reason of strength they be fourscor years, yet is their strength
labour and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fli away.

90:11 who knoweth the power of thine anger? even accord to thy
fear, so is thi wrath.

90:12 So teach us to number our days, that we may appli our hearts
unto wisdom.

90:13 return, O lord, how long? and let it repent thee concern thy
servants.

90:14 O satisfi us earli with thi mercy; that we may rejoic and be
glad all our days.

90:15 make us glad accord to the day wherein thou hast afflicted
us, and the year wherein we have seen evil.

90:16 let thi work appear unto thi servants, and thi glori unto their
children.

90:17 and let the beauti of the lord our god be upon us: and establish
th the work of our hand upon us; yea, the work of our hands
establish thou it.



91:1 He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most high shall abide
und the shadow of the almighty.

91:2 I will say of the lord, He is my refug and my fortress: my god;
in him will I trust.

91:3 sure he shall deliv thee from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisom pestilence.

91:4 He shall cover thee with hi feathers, and under hi wing shalt
thou trust: hi truth shall be thi shield and buckler.

91:5 thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the
arrow that flieth by day;

91:6 nor for the pestil that walketh in darkness; nor for the
destruct that wasteth at noonday.

91:7 A thousand shall fall at thi side, and ten thousand at thi right
hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.

91:8 onli with thine eye shalt thou behold and see the reward of the
wicked.

91:9 becaus thou hast made the lord, which is my refuge, even the
most high, thi habitation;

91:10 there shall no evil befal thee, neither shall ani plagu come
nigh thi dwelling.

91:11 for he shall give hi angel charg over thee, to keep thee in
al thi ways.

91:12 they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thi foot
against a stone.

91:13 thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the
dragon shalt thou trampl under feet.

91:14 becaus he hath set hi love upon me, therefor will I deliver
him: I will set him on high, becaus he hath known my name.

91:15 He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him
in trouble; I will deliv him, and honour him.

91:16 with long life will I satisfi him, and shew him my salvation.



92:1 It is a good thing to give thank unto the lord, and to sing
prais unto thi name, O most high:

92:2 To shew forth thi lovingkind in the morning, and thy
faith everi night,

92:3 upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon
th harp with a solemn sound.

92:4 for thou, lord, hast made me glad through thi work: I will
triumph in the work of thi hands.

92:5 O lord, how great are thi works! and thi thought are veri deep.

92:6 A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.

92:7 when the wick spring as the grass, and when all the worker of
iniqu do flourish; it is that they shall be destroy for ever:

92:8 but thou, lord, art most high for evermore.

92:9 for, lo, thine enemies, O lord, for, lo, thine enemi shall
perish; all the worker of iniqu shall be scattered.

92:10 but my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: i
shal be anoint with fresh oil.

92:11 mine eye also shall see my desir on mine enemies, and mine ears
shal hear my desir of the wick that rise up against me.

92:12 the righteou shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow
lik a cedar in lebanon.

92:13 those that be plant in the hous of the lord shall flourish in
th court of our god.

92:14 they shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat
and flourishing;

92:15 To shew that the lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
unright in him.



93:1 the lord reigneth, he is cloth with majesty; the lord is
cloth with strength, wherewith he hath gird himself: the world
also is stablished, that it cannot be moved.

93:2 thi throne is establish of old: thou art from everlasting.

93:3 the flood have lift up, O lord, the flood have lift up
their voice; the flood lift up their waves.

93:4 the lord on high is mightier than the nois of mani waters, yea,
than the mighti wave of the sea.

93:5 thi testimoni are veri sure: holi becometh thine house, o
lord, for ever.



94:1 O lord god, to whom vengeanc belongeth; O god, to whom vengeance
belongeth, shew thyself.

94:2 lift up thyself, thou judg of the earth: render a reward to the
proud.

94:3 lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked
triumph?

94:4 how long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the
work of iniqu boast themselves?

94:5 they break in piec thi people, O lord, and afflict thine
heritage.

94:6 they slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

94:7 yet they say, the lord shall not see, neither shall the god of
jacob regard it.

94:8 understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will
y be wise?

94:9 He that plant the ear, shall he not hear? he that form the
eye, shall he not see?

94:10 He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that
teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?

94:11 the lord knoweth the thought of man, that they are vanity.

94:12 bless is the man whom thou chastenest, O lord, and teachest
him out of thi law;

94:13 that thou mayest give him rest from the day of adversity, until
th pit be dig for the wicked.

94:14 for the lord will not cast off hi people, neither will he
forsak hi inheritance.

94:15 but judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the
upright in heart shall follow it.

94:16 who will rise up for me against the evildoers? or who will stand
up for me against the worker of iniquity?

94:17 unless the lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence.

94:18 when I said, My foot slippeth; thi mercy, O lord, held me up.

94:19 In the multitud of my thought within me thi comfort delight
mi soul.

94:20 shall the throne of iniqu have fellowship with thee, which
frameth mischief by a law?

94:21 they gather themselv togeth against the soul of the
righteous, and condemn the innoc blood.

94:22 but the lord is my defence; and my god is the rock of my refuge.

94:23 and he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut
them off in their own wickedness; yea, the lord our god shall cut them
off.



95:1 O come, let us sing unto the lord: let us make a joy nois to
th rock of our salvation.

95:2 let us come befor hi presenc with thanksgiving, and make a
joy nois unto him with psalms.

95:3 for the lord is a great god, and a great king abov all gods.

95:4 In hi hand are the deep place of the earth: the strength of the
hil is hi also.

95:5 the sea is his, and he made it: and hi hand form the dry
land.

95:6 O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel befor the lord
our maker.

95:7 for he is our god; and we are the peopl of hi pasture, and the
sheep of hi hand. To day if ye will hear hi voice,

95:8 harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day
of temptat in the wilderness:

95:9 when your father tempt me, prove me, and saw my work.

95:10 forti year long wa I griev with thi generation, and said,
it is a peopl that do err in their heart, and they have not known my
ways:

95:11 unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my
rest.



96:1 O sing unto the lord a new song: sing unto the lord, all the
earth.

96:2 sing unto the lord, bless hi name; shew forth hi salvat from
day to day.

96:3 declar hi glori among the heathen, hi wonder among all
people.

96:4 for the lord is great, and greatli to be praised: he is to be
fear abov all gods.

96:5 for all the god of the nation are idols: but the lord made the
heavens.

96:6 honour and majesti are befor him: strength and beauti are in his
sanctuary.

96:7 give unto the lord, O ye kindr of the people, give unto the
lord glori and strength.

96:8 give unto the lord the glori due unto hi name: bring an
offering, and come into hi courts.

96:9 O worship the lord in the beauti of holiness: fear befor him,
al the earth.

96:10 say among the heathen that the lord reigneth: the world also
shal be establish that it shall not be moved: he shall judg the
peopl righteously.

96:11 let the heaven rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea
roar, and the ful thereof.

96:12 let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all
th tree of the wood rejoice

96:13 befor the lord: for he cometh, for he cometh to judg the
earth: he shall judg the world with righteousness, and the people
with hi truth.



97:1 the lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitud of
isl be glad thereof.

97:2 cloud and dark are round about him: righteous and
judg are the habit of hi throne.

97:3 A fire goeth befor him, and burneth up hi enemi round about.

97:4 hi lightn enlighten the world: the earth saw, and
trembled.

97:5 the hill melt like wax at the presenc of the lord, at the
pres of the lord of the whole earth.

97:6 the heaven declar hi righteousness, and all the peopl see his
glory.

97:7 confound be all they that serv graven images, that boast
themselv of idols: worship him, all ye gods.

97:8 zion heard, and wa glad; and the daughter of judah rejoiced
becaus of thi judgments, O lord.

97:9 for thou, lord, art high abov all the earth: thou art exalted
far abov all gods.

97:10 Ye that love the lord, hate evil: he preserveth the soul of his
saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.

97:11 light is sown for the righteous, and glad for the upright in
heart.

97:12 rejoic in the lord, ye righteous; and give thank at the
remembr of hi holiness.



98:1 O sing unto the lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous
things: hi right hand, and hi holi arm, hath gotten him the victory.

98:2 the lord hath made known hi salvation: hi righteous hath he
openli shew in the sight of the heathen.

98:3 He hath rememb hi merci and hi truth toward the hous of
israel: all the end of the earth have seen the salvat of our god.

98:4 make a joy nois unto the lord, all the earth: make a loud
noise, and rejoice, and sing praise.

98:5 sing unto the lord with the harp; with the harp, and the voic of
a psalm.

98:6 with trumpet and sound of cornet make a joy nois befor the
lord, the king.

98:7 let the sea roar, and the ful thereof; the world, and they
that dwell therein.

98:8 let the flood clap their hands: let the hill be joy together

98:9 befor the lord; for he cometh to judg the earth: with
right shall he judg the world, and the peopl with equity.



99:1 the lord reigneth; let the peopl tremble: he sitteth between the
cherubims; let the earth be moved.

99:2 the lord is great in zion; and he is high abov all the people.

99:3 let them prais thi great and terribl name; for it is holy.

99:4 the king' strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish
equity, thou executest judgment and righteous in jacob.

99:5 exalt ye the lord our god, and worship at hi footstool; for he
i holy.

99:6 mose and aaron among hi priests, and samuel among them that
cal upon hi name; they call upon the lord, and he answer them.

99:7 He spake unto them in the cloudi pillar: they kept his
testimonies, and the ordin that he gave them.

99:8 thou answeredst them, O lord our god: thou wast a god that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeanc of their inventions.

99:9 exalt the lord our god, and worship at hi holi hill; for the
lord our god is holy.



100:1 make a joy nois unto the lord, all ye lands.

100:2 serv the lord with gladness: come befor hi presenc with
singing.

100:3 know ye that the lord he is god: it is he that hath made us, and
not we ourselves; we are hi people, and the sheep of hi pasture.

100:4 enter into hi gate with thanksgiving, and into hi court with
praise: be thank unto him, and bless hi name.

100:5 for the lord is good; hi merci is everlasting; and hi truth
endureth to all generations.



101:1 I will sing of merci and judgment: unto thee, O lord, will i
sing.

101:2 I will behav myself wise in a perfect way. O when wilt thou
com unto me? I will walk within my hous with a perfect heart.

101:3 I will set no wick thing befor mine eyes: I hate the work of
them that turn aside; it shall not cleav to me.

101:4 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked
person.

101:5 whoso privili slandereth hi neighbour, him will I cut off: him
that hath an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer.

101:6 mine eye shall be upon the faith of the land, that they may
dwel with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serv me.

101:7 He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that
telleth lie shall not tarri in my sight.

101:8 I will earli destroy all the wick of the land; that I may cut
off all wick doer from the citi of the lord.



102:1 hear my prayer, O lord, and let my cri come unto thee.

102:2 hide not thi face from me in the day when I am in trouble;
inclin thine ear unto me: in the day when I call answer me speedily.

102:3 for my day are consum like smoke, and my bone are burn as
an hearth.

102:4 My heart is smitten, and wither like grass; so that I forget
to eat my bread.

102:5 By reason of the voic of my groan my bone cleav to my
skin.

102:6 I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the
desert.

102:7 I watch, and am as a sparrow alon upon the hous top.

102:8 mine enemi reproach me all the day; and they that are mad
against me are sworn against me.

102:9 for I have eaten ash like bread, and mingl my drink with
weeping.

102:10 becaus of thine indign and thi wrath: for thou hast
lift me up, and cast me down.

102:11 My day are like a shadow that declineth; and I am withered
lik grass.

102:12 but thou, O lord, shall endur for ever; and thi remembrance
unto all generations.

102:13 thou shalt arise, and have merci upon zion: for the time to
favour her, yea, the set time, is come.

102:14 for thi servant take pleasur in her stones, and favour the
dust thereof.

102:15 So the heathen shall fear the name of the lord, and all the
k of the earth thi glory.

102:16 when the lord shall build up zion, he shall appear in his
glory.

102:17 He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
their prayer.

102:18 thi shall be written for the gener to come: and the
peopl which shall be creat shall prais the lord.

102:19 for he hath look down from the height of hi sanctuary; from
heaven did the lord behold the earth;

102:20 To hear the groan of the prisoner; to loos those that are
appoint to death;

102:21 To declar the name of the lord in zion, and hi prais in
jerusalem;

102:22 when the peopl are gather together, and the kingdoms, to
serv the lord.

102:23 He weaken my strength in the way; he shorten my days.

102:24 I said, O my god, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy
year are throughout all generations.

102:25 Of old hast thou laid the foundat of the earth: and the
heaven are the work of thi hands.

102:26 they shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them
shal wax old like a garment; as a vestur shalt thou chang them, and
they shall be changed:

102:27 but thou art the same, and thi year shall have no end.

102:28 the children of thi servant shall continue, and their seed
shal be establish befor thee.



103:1 bless the lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his
holi name.

103:2 bless the lord, O my soul, and forget not all hi benefits:

103:3 who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy
diseases;

103:4 who redeemeth thi life from destruction; who crowneth thee with
lovingkind and tender mercies;

103:5 who satisfieth thi mouth with good things; so that thi youth is
renew like the eagle's.

103:6 the lord executeth righteous and judgment for all that are
oppressed.

103:7 He made known hi way unto moses, hi act unto the children of
israel.

103:8 the lord is merci and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous
in mercy.

103:9 He will not alway chide: neither will he keep hi anger for
ever.

103:10 He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor reward us
accord to our iniquities.

103:11 for as the heaven is high abov the earth, so great is his
merci toward them that fear him.

103:12 As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he remov our
transgress from us.

103:13 like as a father pitieth hi children, so the lord pitieth them
that fear him.

103:14 for he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust.

103:15 As for man, hi day are as grass: as a flower of the field, so
h flourisheth.

103:16 for the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place
thereof shall know it no more.

103:17 but the merci of the lord is from everlast to everlasting
upon them that fear him, and hi righteous unto children's
children;

103:18 To such as keep hi covenant, and to those that rememb his
command to do them.

103:19 the lord hath prepar hi throne in the heavens; and his
kingdom ruleth over all.

103:20 bless the lord, ye hi angels, that excel in strength, that do
hi commandments, hearken unto the voic of hi word.

103:21 bless ye the lord, all ye hi hosts; ye minist of his, that
do hi pleasure.

103:22 bless the lord, all hi work in all place of hi dominion:
bless the lord, O my soul.



104:1 bless the lord, O my soul. O lord my god, thou art veri great;
thou art cloth with honour and majesty.

104:2 who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who
stretchest out the heaven like a curtain:

104:3 who layeth the beam of hi chamber in the waters: who maketh
th cloud hi chariot: who walketh upon the wing of the wind:

104:4 who maketh hi angel spirits; hi minist a flame fire:

104:5 who laid the foundat of the earth, that it should not be
remov for ever.

104:6 thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters
stood abov the mountains.

104:7 At thi rebuk they fled; at the voic of thi thunder they hasted
away.

104:8 they go up by the mountains; they go down by the valley unto
th place which thou hast found for them.

104:9 thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they
turn not again to cover the earth.

104:10 He sendeth the spring into the valleys, which run among the
hills.

104:11 they give drink to everi beast of the field: the wild asses
quench their thirst.

104:12 By them shall the fowl of the heaven have their habitation,
which sing among the branches.

104:13 He watereth the hill from hi chambers: the earth is satisfied
with the fruit of thi works.

104:14 He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
servic of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth;

104:15 and wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his
fac to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man' heart.

104:16 the tree of the lord are full of sap; the cedar of lebanon,
which he hath planted;

104:17 where the bird make their nests: as for the stork, the fir
tre are her house.

104:18 the high hill are a refug for the wild goats; and the rocks
for the conies.

104:19 He appoint the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth hi going
down.

104:20 thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts
of the forest do creep forth.

104:21 the young lion roar after their prey, and seek their meat from
god.

104:22 the sun ariseth, they gather themselv together, and lay them
down in their dens.

104:23 man goeth forth unto hi work and to hi labour until the
evening.

104:24 O lord, how manifold are thi works! in wisdom hast thou made
them all: the earth is full of thi riches.

104:25 So is thi great and wide sea, wherein are thing creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts.

104:26 there go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast
mad to play therein.

104:27 these wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat
in due season.

104:28 that thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand,
they are fill with good.

104:29 thou hidest thi face, they are troubled: thou takest away their
breath, they die, and return to their dust.

104:30 thou sendest forth thi spirit, they are created: and thou
renewest the face of the earth.

104:31 the glori of the lord shall endur for ever: the lord shall
rejoic in hi works.

104:32 He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the
hills, and they smoke.

104:33 I will sing unto the lord as long as I live: I will sing praise
to my god while I have my being.

104:34 My medit of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the
lord.

104:35 let the sinner be consum out of the earth, and let the
wick be no more. bless thou the lord, O my soul. prais ye the lord.



105:1 O give thank unto the lord; call upon hi name: make known his
de among the people.

105:2 sing unto him, sing psalm unto him: talk ye of all hi wondrous
works.

105:3 glori ye in hi holi name: let the heart of them rejoic that
seek the lord.

105:4 seek the lord, and hi strength: seek hi face evermore.

105:5 rememb hi marvel work that he hath done; hi wonders,
and the judgment of hi mouth;

105:6 O ye seed of abraham hi servant, ye children of jacob his
chosen.

105:7 He is the lord our god: hi judgment are in all the earth.

105:8 He hath rememb hi coven for ever, the word which he
command to a thousand generations.

105:9 which coven he made with abraham, and hi oath unto isaac;

105:10 and confirm the same unto jacob for a law, and to israel for
an everlast covenant:

105:11 saying, unto thee will I give the land of canaan, the lot of
your inheritance:

105:12 when they were but a few men in number; yea, veri few, and
strang in it.

105:13 when they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to
anoth people;

105:14 He suffer no man to do them wrong: yea, he reprov king for
their sakes;

105:15 saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my prophet no harm.

105:16 moreov he call for a famin upon the land: he brake the
whol staff of bread.

105:17 He sent a man befor them, even joseph, who wa sold for a
servant:

105:18 whose feet they hurt with fetters: he wa laid in iron:

105:19 until the time that hi word came: the word of the lord tried
him.

105:20 the king sent and loos him; even the ruler of the people, and
let him go free.

105:21 He made him lord of hi house, and ruler of all hi substance:

105:22 To bind hi princ at hi pleasure; and teach hi senators
wisdom.

105:23 israel also came into egypt; and jacob sojourn in the land of
ham.

105:24 and he increas hi peopl greatly; and made them stronger
than their enemies.

105:25 He turn their heart to hate hi people, to deal subtilli with
hi servants.

105:26 He sent mose hi servant; and aaron whom he had chosen.

105:27 they shew hi sign among them, and wonder in the land of
ham.

105:28 He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebel not
against hi word.

105:29 He turn their water into blood, and slew their fish.

105:30 their land brought forth frog in abundance, in the chamber of
their kings.

105:31 He spake, and there came diver sort of flies, and lice in all
their coasts.

105:32 He gave them hail for rain, and flame fire in their land.

105:33 He smote their vine also and their fig trees; and brake the
tre of their coasts.

105:34 He spake, and the locust came, and caterpillers, and that
without number,

105:35 and did eat up all the herb in their land, and devour the
fruit of their ground.

105:36 He smote also all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all
their strength.

105:37 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was
not one feebl person among their tribes.

105:38 egypt wa glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell
upon them.

105:39 He spread a cloud for a covering; and fire to give light in the
night.

105:40 the peopl asked, and he brought quails, and satisfi them
with the bread of heaven.

105:41 He open the rock, and the water gush out; they ran in the
dri place like a river.

105:42 for he rememb hi holi promise, and abraham hi servant.

105:43 and he brought forth hi peopl with joy, and hi chosen with
gladness:

105:44 and gave them the land of the heathen: and they inherit the
labour of the people;

105:45 that they might observ hi statutes, and keep hi laws. praise
y the lord.



106:1 prais ye the lord. O give thank unto the lord; for he is good:
for hi merci endureth for ever.

106:2 who can utter the mighti act of the lord? who can shew forth
al hi praise?

106:3 bless are they that keep judgment, and he that doeth
right at all times.

106:4 rememb me, O lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy
people: O visit me with thi salvation;

106:5 that I may see the good of thi chosen, that I may rejoic in the
glad of thi nation, that I may glori with thine inheritance.

106:6 We have sin with our fathers, we have commit iniquity, we
hav done wickedly.

106:7 our father understood not thi wonder in egypt; they remembered
not the multitud of thi mercies; but provok him at the sea, even at
th red sea.

106:8 nevertheless he save them for hi name' sake, that he might
mak hi mighti power to be known.

106:9 He rebuk the red sea also, and it wa dri up: so he led them
through the depths, as through the wilderness.

106:10 and he save them from the hand of him that hate them, and
redeem them from the hand of the enemy.

106:11 and the water cover their enemies: there wa not one of them
left.

106:12 then believ they hi words; they sang hi praise.

106:13 they soon forgat hi works; they wait not for hi counsel:

106:14 but lust exceedingli in the wilderness, and tempt god in
th desert.

106:15 and he gave them their request; but sent lean into their
soul.

106:16 they envi mose also in the camp, and aaron the saint of the
lord.

106:17 the earth open and swallow up dathan and cover the
compani of abiram.

106:18 and a fire wa kindl in their company; the flame burn up
th wicked.

106:19 they made a calf in horeb, and worship the molten image.

106:20 thu they chang their glori into the similitud of an ox that
eateth grass.

106:21 they forgat god their saviour, which had done great thing in
egypt;

106:22 wondrou work in the land of ham, and terribl thing by the
r sea.

106:23 therefor he said that he would destroy them, had not mose his
chosen stood befor him in the breach, to turn away hi wrath, lest he
should destroy them.

106:24 yea, they despis the pleasant land, they believ not his
word:

106:25 but murmur in their tents, and hearken not unto the voice
of the lord.

106:26 therefor he lift up hi hand against them, to overthrow them
in the wilderness:

106:27 To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter
them in the lands.

106:28 they join themselv also unto baalpeor, and ate the
sacrific of the dead.

106:29 thu they provok him to anger with their inventions: and the
plagu brake in upon them.

106:30 then stood up phinehas, and execut judgment: and so the
plagu wa stayed.

106:31 and that wa count unto him for righteous unto all
gener for evermore.

106:32 they anger him also at the water of strife, so that it went
il with mose for their sakes:

106:33 becaus they provok hi spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly
with hi lips.

106:34 they did not destroy the nations, concern whom the lord
command them:

106:35 but were mingl among the heathen, and learn their works.

106:36 and they serv their idols: which were a snare unto them.

106:37 yea, they sacrif their son and their daughter unto
devils,

106:38 and shed innoc blood, even the blood of their son and of
their daughters, whom they sacrif unto the idol of canaan: and
th land wa pollut with blood.

106:39 thu were they defil with their own works, and went a whoring
with their own inventions.

106:40 therefor wa the wrath of the lord kindl against hi people,
insomuch that he abhor hi own inheritance.

106:41 and he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that
hat them rule over them.

106:42 their enemi also oppress them, and they were brought into
subject under their hand.

106:43 mani time did he deliv them; but they provok him with
their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.

106:44 nevertheless he regard their affliction, when he heard their
cry:

106:45 and he rememb for them hi covenant, and repent according
to the multitud of hi mercies.

106:46 He made them also to be piti of all those that carri them
captives.

106:47 save us, O lord our god, and gather us from among the heathen,
to give thank unto thi holi name, and to triumph in thi praise.

106:48 bless be the lord god of israel from everlast to
everlasting: and let all the peopl say, amen. prais ye the lord.



107:1 O give thank unto the lord, for he is good: for hi mercy
endureth for ever.

107:2 let the redeem of the lord say so, whom he hath redeem from
th hand of the enemy;

107:3 and gather them out of the lands, from the east, and from the
west, from the north, and from the south.

107:4 they wander in the wilder in a solitari way; they found no
citi to dwell in.

107:5 hungri and thirsty, their soul faint in them.

107:6 then they cri unto the lord in their trouble, and he delivered
them out of their distresses.

107:7 and he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a
citi of habitation.

107:8 Oh that men would prais the lord for hi goodness, and for his
wond work to the children of men!

107:9 for he satisfieth the long soul, and filleth the hungri soul
with goodness.

107:10 such as sit in dark and in the shadow of death, be bound
in afflict and iron;

107:11 becaus they rebel against the word of god, and contemned
th counsel of the most high:

107:12 therefor he brought down their heart with labour; they fell
down, and there wa none to help.

107:13 then they cri unto the lord in their trouble, and he saved
them out of their distresses.

107:14 He brought them out of dark and the shadow of death, and
brak their band in sunder.

107:15 Oh that men would prais the lord for hi goodness, and for his
wond work to the children of men!

107:16 for he hath broken the gate of brass, and cut the bar of iron
in sunder.

107:17 fool becaus of their transgression, and becaus of their
iniquities, are afflicted.

107:18 their soul abhorreth all manner of meat; and they draw near
unto the gate of death.

107:19 then they cri unto the lord in their trouble, and he saveth
them out of their distresses.

107:20 He sent hi word, and heal them, and deliv them from
their destructions.

107:21 Oh that men would prais the lord for hi goodness, and for his
wond work to the children of men!

107:22 and let them sacrific the sacrific of thanksgiving, and
declar hi work with rejoicing.

107:23 they that go down to the sea in ships, that do busi in
great waters;

107:24 these see the work of the lord, and hi wonder in the deep.

107:25 for he commandeth, and raiseth the stormi wind, which lifteth
up the wave thereof.

107:26 they mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths:
their soul is melt becaus of trouble.

107:27 they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are
at their wit' end.

107:28 then they cri unto the lord in their trouble, and he bringeth
them out of their distresses.

107:29 He maketh the storm a calm, so that the wave thereof are
still.

107:30 then are they glad becaus they be quiet; so he bringeth them
unto their desir haven.

107:31 Oh that men would prais the lord for hi goodness, and for his
wond work to the children of men!

107:32 let them exalt him also in the congreg of the people, and
prais him in the assembl of the elders.

107:33 He turneth river into a wilderness, and the waterspr into
dri ground;

107:34 A fruit land into barrenness, for the wicked of them
that dwell therein.

107:35 He turneth the wilder into a stand water, and dri ground
into watersprings.

107:36 and there he maketh the hungri to dwell, that they may prepare
a citi for habitation;

107:37 and sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits
of increase.

107:38 He blesseth them also, so that they are multipli greatly; and
suffereth not their cattl to decrease.

107:39 again, they are minish and brought low through oppression,
affliction, and sorrow.

107:40 He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in
th wilderness, where there is no way.

107:41 yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him
famili like a flock.

107:42 the righteou shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniqu shall
stop her mouth.

107:43 whoso is wise, and will observ these things, even they shall
understand the lovingkind of the lord.



108:1 O god, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with
mi glory.

108:2 awake, psalteri and harp: I myself will awak early.

108:3 I will prais thee, O lord, among the people: and I will sing
prais unto thee among the nations.

108:4 for thi merci is great abov the heavens: and thi truth reacheth
unto the clouds.

108:5 Be thou exalted, O god, abov the heavens: and thi glori above
al the earth;

108:6 that thi belov may be delivered: save with thi right hand, and
answ me.

108:7 god hath spoken in hi holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide
shechem, and mete out the valley of succoth.

108:8 gilead is mine; manasseh is mine; ephraim also is the strength
of mine head; judah is my lawgiver;

108:9 moab is my washpot; over edom will I cast out my shoe; over
philistia will I triumph.

108:10 who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
edom?

108:11 wilt not thou, O god, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou,
o god, go forth with our hosts?

108:12 give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

108:13 through god we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall
tread down our enemies.



109:1 hold not thi peace, O god of my praise;

109:2 for the mouth of the wick and the mouth of the deceit are
open against me: they have spoken against me with a lie tongue.

109:3 they compass me about also with word of hatred; and fought
against me without a cause.

109:4 for my love they are my adversaries: but I give myself unto
prayer.

109:5 and they have reward me evil for good, and hatr for my love.

109:6 set thou a wick man over him: and let satan stand at hi right
hand.

109:7 when he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his
pray becom sin.

109:8 let hi day be few; and let anoth take hi office.

109:9 let hi children be fatherless, and hi wife a widow.

109:10 let hi children be continu vagabonds, and beg: let them
seek their bread also out of their desol places.

109:11 let the extortion catch all that he hath; and let the
strang spoil hi labour.

109:12 let there be none to extend merci unto him: neither let there
b ani to favour hi fatherless children.

109:13 let hi poster be cut off; and in the gener following
let their name be blot out.

109:14 let the iniqu of hi father be rememb with the lord;
and let not the sin of hi mother be blot out.

109:15 let them be befor the lord continually, that he may cut off
th memori of them from the earth.

109:16 becaus that he rememb not to shew mercy, but persecuted
th poor and needi man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.

109:17 As he love cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted
not in blessing, so let it be far from him.

109:18 As he cloth himself with curs like as with hi garment, so
let it come into hi bowel like water, and like oil into hi bones.

109:19 let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a
girdl wherewith he is gird continually.

109:20 let thi be the reward of mine adversari from the lord, and
of them that speak evil against my soul.

109:21 but do thou for me, O god the lord, for thi name' sake:
becaus thi merci is good, deliv thou me.

109:22 for I am poor and needy, and my heart is wound within me.

109:23 I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am toss up and
down as the locust.

109:24 My knee are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of
fatness.

109:25 I becam also a reproach unto them: when they look upon me
they shake their heads.

109:26 help me, O lord my god: O save me accord to thi mercy:

109:27 that they may know that thi is thi hand; that thou, lord, hast
don it.

109:28 let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be
ashamed; but let thi servant rejoice.

109:29 let mine adversari be cloth with shame, and let them cover
themselv with their own confusion, as with a mantle.

109:30 I will greatli prais the lord with my mouth; yea, I will
prais him among the multitude.

109:31 for he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him
from those that condemn hi soul.



110:1 the lord said unto my lord, sit thou at my right hand, until i
mak thine enemi thi footstool.

110:2 the lord shall send the rod of thi strength out of zion: rule
th in the midst of thine enemies.

110:3 thi peopl shall be will in the day of thi power, in the
beauti of holi from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew
of thi youth.

110:4 the lord hath sworn, and will not repent, thou art a priest for
ev after the order of melchizedek.

110:5 the lord at thi right hand shall strike through king in the day
of hi wrath.

110:6 He shall judg among the heathen, he shall fill the place with
th dead bodies; he shall wound the head over mani countries.

110:7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefor shall he lift
up the head.



111:1 prais ye the lord. I will prais the lord with my whole heart,
in the assembl of the upright, and in the congregation.

111:2 the work of the lord are great, sought out of all them that
hav pleasur therein.

111:3 hi work is honour and glorious: and hi righteousness
endureth for ever.

111:4 He hath made hi wonder work to be remembered: the lord is
graci and full of compassion.

111:5 He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be
mind of hi covenant.

111:6 He hath shew hi peopl the power of hi works, that he may
giv them the heritag of the heathen.

111:7 the work of hi hand are veriti and judgment; all his
command are sure.

111:8 they stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and
uprightness.

111:9 He sent redempt unto hi people: he hath command his
coven for ever: holi and reverend is hi name.

111:10 the fear of the lord is the begin of wisdom: a good
understand have all they that do hi commandments: hi praise
endureth for ever.



112:1 prais ye the lord. bless is the man that feareth the lord,
that delighteth greatli in hi commandments.

112:2 hi seed shall be mighti upon earth: the gener of the
upright shall be blessed.

112:3 wealth and rich shall be in hi house: and hi righteousness
endureth for ever.

112:4 unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: he is
gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous.

112:5 A good man sheweth favour, and lendeth: he will guid his
affair with discretion.

112:6 sure he shall not be move for ever: the righteou shall be in
everlast remembrance.

112:7 He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: hi heart is fixed,
trust in the lord.

112:8 hi heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see
hi desir upon hi enemies.

112:9 He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; hi righteousness
endureth for ever; hi horn shall be exalt with honour.

112:10 the wick shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with
hi teeth, and melt away: the desir of the wick shall perish.



113:1 prais ye the lord. praise, O ye servant of the lord, praise
th name of the lord.

113:2 bless be the name of the lord from thi time forth and for
evermore.

113:3 from the rise of the sun unto the go down of the same the
lord' name is to be praised.

113:4 the lord is high abov all nations, and hi glori abov the
heavens.

113:5 who is like unto the lord our god, who dwelleth on high,

113:6 who humbleth himself to behold the thing that are in heaven,
and in the earth!

113:7 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy
out of the dunghill;

113:8 that he may set him with princes, even with the princ of his
people.

113:9 He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful
moth of children. prais ye the lord.



114:1 when israel went out of egypt, the hous of jacob from a people
of strang language;

114:2 judah wa hi sanctuary, and israel hi dominion.

114:3 the sea saw it, and fled: jordan wa driven back.

114:4 the mountain skip like rams, and the littl hill like
lambs.

114:5 what ail thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou jordan,
that thou wast driven back?

114:6 Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams; and ye littl hills,
lik lambs?

114:7 tremble, thou earth, at the presenc of the lord, at the
pres of the god of jacob;

114:8 which turn the rock into a stand water, the flint into a
fountain of waters.



115:1 not unto us, O lord, not unto us, but unto thi name give glory,
for thi mercy, and for thi truth' sake.

115:2 wherefor should the heathen say, where is now their god?

115:3 but our god is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoev he hath
pleased.

115:4 their idol are silver and gold, the work of men' hands.

115:5 they have mouths, but they speak not: eye have they, but they
se not:

115:6 they have ears, but they hear not: nose have they, but they
smel not:

115:7 they have hands, but they handl not: feet have they, but they
walk not: neither speak they through their throat.

115:8 they that make them are like unto them; so is everi one that
trusteth in them.

115:9 O israel, trust thou in the lord: he is their help and their
shield.

115:10 O hous of aaron, trust in the lord: he is their help and their
shield.

115:11 Ye that fear the lord, trust in the lord: he is their help and
their shield.

115:12 the lord hath been mind of us: he will bless us; he will
bless the hous of israel; he will bless the hous of aaron.

115:13 He will bless them that fear the lord, both small and great.

115:14 the lord shall increas you more and more, you and your
children.

115:15 Ye are bless of the lord which made heaven and earth.

115:16 the heaven, even the heavens, are the lord's: but the earth
hath he given to the children of men.

115:17 the dead prais not the lord, neither ani that go down into
silence.

115:18 but we will bless the lord from thi time forth and for
evermore.

prais the lord.



116:1 I love the lord, becaus he hath heard my voic and my
supplications.

116:2 becaus he hath inclin hi ear unto me, therefor will I call
upon him as long as I live.

116:3 the sorrow of death compass me, and the pain of hell gat
hold upon me: I found troubl and sorrow.

116:4 then call I upon the name of the lord; O lord, I beseech thee,
deliv my soul.

116:5 graciou is the lord, and righteous; yea, our god is merciful.

116:6 the lord preserveth the simple: I wa brought low, and he helped
me.

116:7 return unto thi rest, O my soul; for the lord hath dealt
bounti with thee.

116:8 for thou hast deliv my soul from death, mine eye from
tears, and my feet from falling.

116:9 I will walk befor the lord in the land of the living.

116:10 I believed, therefor have I spoken: I wa greatli afflicted:

116:11 I said in my haste, all men are liars.

116:12 what shall I render unto the lord for all hi benefit toward
me?

116:13 I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
lord.

116:14 I will pay my vow unto the lord now in the presenc of all his
people.

116:15 preciou in the sight of the lord is the death of hi saints.

116:16 O lord, truli I am thi servant; I am thi servant, and the son
of thine handmaid: thou hast loos my bonds.

116:17 I will offer to thee the sacrific of thanksgiving, and will
cal upon the name of the lord.

116:18 I will pay my vow unto the lord now in the presenc of all his
people.

116:19 In the court of the lord' house, in the midst of thee, o
jerusalem. prais ye the lord.



117:1 O prais the lord, all ye nations: prais him, all ye people.

117:2 for hi merci kind is great toward us: and the truth of
th lord endureth for ever. prais ye the lord.



118:1 O give thank unto the lord; for he is good: becaus hi mercy
endureth for ever.

118:2 let israel now say, that hi merci endureth for ever.

118:3 let the hous of aaron now say, that hi merci endureth for
ever.

118:4 let them now that fear the lord say, that hi merci endureth for
ever.

118:5 I call upon the lord in distress: the lord answer me, and
set me in a larg place.

118:6 the lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto
me?

118:7 the lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefor shall
i see my desir upon them that hate me.

118:8 It is better to trust in the lord than to put confid in man.

118:9 It is better to trust in the lord than to put confid in
princes.

118:10 all nation compass me about: but in the name of the lord
wil I destroy them.

118:11 they compass me about; yea, they compass me about: but in
th name of the lord I will destroy them.

118:12 they compass me about like bees: they are quench as the
fir of thorns: for in the name of the lord I will destroy them.

118:13 thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the lord
help me.

118:14 the lord is my strength and song, and is becom my salvation.

118:15 the voic of rejoic and salvat is in the tabernacl of
th righteous: the right hand of the lord doeth valiantly.

118:16 the right hand of the lord is exalted: the right hand of the
lord doeth valiantly.

118:17 I shall not die, but live, and declar the work of the lord.

118:18 the lord hath chasten me sore: but he hath not given me over
unto death.

118:19 open to me the gate of righteousness: I will go into them, and
i will prais the lord:

118:20 thi gate of the lord, into which the righteou shall enter.

118:21 I will prais thee: for thou hast heard me, and art becom my
salvation.

118:22 the stone which the builder refus is becom the head stone
of the corner.

118:23 thi is the lord' doing; it is marvel in our eyes.

118:24 thi is the day which the lord hath made; we will rejoic and
b glad in it.

118:25 save now, I beseech thee, O lord: O lord, I beseech thee, send
now prosperity.

118:26 bless be he that cometh in the name of the lord: we have
bless you out of the hous of the lord.

118:27 god is the lord, which hath shew us light: bind the sacrifice
with cords, even unto the horn of the altar.

118:28 thou art my god, and I will prais thee: thou art my god, i
wil exalt thee.

118:29 O give thank unto the lord; for he is good: for hi mercy
endureth for ever.



119:1 bless are the undefil in the way, who walk in the law of the
lord.

119:2 bless are they that keep hi testimonies, and that seek him
with the whole heart.

119:3 they also do no iniquity: they walk in hi ways.

119:4 thou hast command us to keep thi precept diligently.

119:5 O that my way were direct to keep thi statutes!

119:6 then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

119:7 I will prais thee with upright of heart, when I shall have
learn thi righteou judgments.

119:8 I will keep thi statutes: O forsak me not utterly.

119:9 wherewith shall a young man cleans hi way? by take heed
thereto accord to thi word.

119:10 with my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander
from thi commandments.

119:11 thi word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee.

119:12 bless art thou, O lord: teach me thi statutes.

119:13 with my lip have I declar all the judgment of thi mouth.

119:14 I have rejoic in the way of thi testimonies, as much as in
al riches.

119:15 I will medit in thi precepts, and have respect unto thy
ways.

119:16 I will delight myself in thi statutes: I will not forget thy
word.

119:17 deal bounti with thi servant, that I may live, and keep
thi word.

119:18 open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrou thing out of
thi law.

119:19 I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thi command from
me.

119:20 My soul breaketh for the long that it hath unto thy
judg at all times.

119:21 thou hast rebuk the proud that are cursed, which do err from
thi commandments.

119:22 remov from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy
testimonies.

119:23 princ also did sit and speak against me: but thi servant did
medit in thi statutes.

119:24 thi testimoni also are my delight and my counsellors.

119:25 My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me accord to
thi word.

119:26 I have declar my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy
statutes.

119:27 make me to understand the way of thi precepts: so shall I talk
of thi wondrou works.

119:28 My soul melteth for heaviness: strengthen thou me according
unto thi word.

119:29 remov from me the way of lying: and grant me thi law
graciously.

119:30 I have chosen the way of truth: thi judgment have I laid
befor me.

119:31 I have stuck unto thi testimonies: O lord, put me not to shame.

119:32 I will run the way of thi commandments, when thou shalt enlarge
mi heart.

119:33 teach me, O lord, the way of thi statutes; and I shall keep it
unto the end.

119:34 give me understanding, and I shall keep thi law; yea, I shall
observ it with my whole heart.

119:35 make me to go in the path of thi commandments; for therein do i
delight.

119:36 inclin my heart unto thi testimonies, and not to covetousness.

119:37 turn away mine eye from behold vanity; and quicken thou me
in thi way.

119:38 stablish thi word unto thi servant, who is devot to thi fear.

119:39 turn away my reproach which I fear: for thi judgment are good.

119:40 behold, I have long after thi precepts: quicken me in thy
righteousness.

119:41 let thi merci come also unto me, O lord, even thi salvation,
accord to thi word.

119:42 So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me:
for I trust in thi word.

119:43 and take not the word of truth utterli out of my mouth; for i
hav hope in thi judgments.

119:44 So shall I keep thi law continu for ever and ever.

119:45 and I will walk at liberty: for I seek thi precepts.

119:46 I will speak of thi testimoni also befor kings, and will not
b ashamed.

119:47 and I will delight myself in thi commandments, which I have
loved.

119:48 My hand also will I lift up unto thi commandments, which i
hav loved; and I will medit in thi statutes.

119:49 rememb the word unto thi servant, upon which thou hast caused
m to hope.

119:50 thi is my comfort in my affliction: for thi word hath
quicken me.

119:51 the proud have had me greatli in derision: yet have I not
declin from thi law.

119:52 I rememb thi judgment of old, O lord; and have comforted
myself.

119:53 horror hath taken hold upon me becaus of the wick that
forsak thi law.

119:54 thi statut have been my song in the hous of my pilgrimage.

119:55 I have rememb thi name, O lord, in the night, and have kept
thi law.

119:56 thi I had, becaus I kept thi precepts.

119:57 thou art my portion, O lord: I have said that I would keep thy
words.

119:58 I intreat thi favour with my whole heart: be merci unto me
accord to thi word.

119:59 I thought on my ways, and turn my feet unto thi testimonies.

119:60 I made haste, and delay not to keep thi commandments.

119:61 the band of the wick have rob me: but I have not
forgotten thi law.

119:62 At midnight I will rise to give thank unto thee becaus of thy
right judgments.

119:63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that
keep thi precepts.

119:64 the earth, O lord, is full of thi mercy: teach me thi statutes.

119:65 thou hast dealt well with thi servant, O lord, accord unto
thi word.

119:66 teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believ thy
commandments.

119:67 befor I wa afflict I went astray: but now have I kept thy
word.

119:68 thou art good, and doest good; teach me thi statutes.

119:69 the proud have forg a lie against me: but I will keep thy
precept with my whole heart.

119:70 their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thi law.

119:71 It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might
learn thi statutes.

119:72 the law of thi mouth is better unto me than thousand of gold
and silver.

119:73 thi hand have made me and fashion me: give me understanding,
that I may learn thi commandments.

119:74 they that fear thee will be glad when they see me; becaus i
hav hope in thi word.

119:75 I know, O lord, that thi judgment are right, and that thou in
faith hast afflict me.

119:76 let, I pray thee, thi merci kind be for my comfort,
accord to thi word unto thi servant.

119:77 let thi tender merci come unto me, that I may live: for thy
law is my delight.

119:78 let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt pervers with me
without a cause: but I will medit in thi precepts.

119:79 let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have
known thi testimonies.

119:80 let my heart be sound in thi statutes; that I be not ashamed.

119:81 My soul fainteth for thi salvation: but I hope in thi word.

119:82 mine eye fail for thi word, saying, when wilt thou comfort me?

119:83 for I am becom like a bottl in the smoke; yet do I not forget
thi statutes.

119:84 how mani are the day of thi servant? when wilt thou execute
judg on them that persecut me?

119:85 the proud have dig pit for me, which are not after thi law.

119:86 all thi command are faithful: they persecut me
wrongfully; help thou me.

119:87 they had almost consum me upon earth; but I forsook not thy
precepts.

119:88 quicken me after thi lovingkindness; so shall I keep the
testimoni of thi mouth.

119:89 for ever, O lord, thi word is settl in heaven.

119:90 thi faith is unto all generations: thou hast established
th earth, and it abideth.

119:91 they continu thi day accord to thine ordinances: for all
ar thi servants.

119:92 unless thi law had been my delights, I should then have
perish in mine affliction.

119:93 I will never forget thi precepts: for with them thou hast
quicken me.

119:94 I am thine, save me: for I have sought thi precepts.

119:95 the wick have wait for me to destroy me: but I will
consid thi testimonies.

119:96 I have seen an end of all perfection: but thi command is
exceed broad.

119:97 O how I love thi law! it is my medit all the day.

119:98 thou through thi command hast made me wiser than mine
enemies: for they are ever with me.

119:99 I have more understand than all my teachers: for thy
testimoni are my meditation.

119:100 I understand more than the ancients, becaus I keep thy
precepts.

119:101 I have refrain my feet from everi evil way, that I might
keep thi word.

119:102 I have not depart from thi judgments: for thou hast taught
me.

119:103 how sweet are thi word unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey
to my mouth!

119:104 through thi precept I get understanding: therefor I hate
everi fals way.

119:105 thi word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

119:106 I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
right judgments.

119:107 I am afflict veri much: quicken me, O lord, accord unto
thi word.

119:108 accept, I beseech thee, the freewil offer of my mouth, o
lord, and teach me thi judgments.

119:109 My soul is continu in my hand: yet do I not forget thy
law.

119:110 the wick have laid a snare for me: yet I er not from thy
precepts.

119:111 thi testimoni have I taken as an heritag for ever: for they
ar the rejoic of my heart.

119:112 I have inclin mine heart to perform thi statut alway, even
unto the end.

119:113 I hate vain thoughts: but thi law do I love.

119:114 thou art my hide place and my shield: I hope in thi word.

119:115 depart from me, ye evildoers: for I will keep the commandments
of my god.

119:116 uphold me accord unto thi word, that I may live: and let me
not be asham of my hope.

119:117 hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect
unto thi statut continually.

119:118 thou hast trodden down all them that err from thi statutes:
for their deceit is falsehood.

119:119 thou puttest away all the wick of the earth like dross:
therefor I love thi testimonies.

119:120 My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy
judgments.

119:121 I have done judgment and justice: leav me not to mine
oppressors.

119:122 Be sureti for thi servant for good: let not the proud oppress
me.

119:123 mine eye fail for thi salvation, and for the word of thy
righteousness.

119:124 deal with thi servant accord unto thi mercy, and teach me
thi statutes.

119:125 I am thi servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy
testimonies.

119:126 It is time for thee, lord, to work: for they have made void
thi law.

119:127 therefor I love thi command abov gold; yea, abov fine
gold.

119:128 therefor I esteem all thi precept concern all thing to
b right; and I hate everi fals way.

119:129 thi testimoni are wonderful: therefor doth my soul keep
them.

119:130 the entranc of thi word giveth light; it giveth
understand unto the simple.

119:131 I open my mouth, and panted: for I long for thy
commandments.

119:132 look thou upon me, and be merci unto me, as thou usest to
do unto those that love thi name.

119:133 order my step in thi word: and let not ani iniqu have
dominion over me.

119:134 deliv me from the oppress of man: so will I keep thy
precepts.

119:135 make thi face to shine upon thi servant; and teach me thy
statutes.

119:136 river of water run down mine eyes, becaus they keep not thy
law.

119:137 righteou art thou, O lord, and upright are thi judgments.

119:138 thi testimoni that thou hast command are righteou and
veri faithful.

119:139 My zeal hath consum me, becaus mine enemi have forgotten
thi words.

119:140 thi word is veri pure: therefor thi servant loveth it.

119:141 I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thi precepts.

119:142 thi righteous is an everlast righteousness, and thi law
i the truth.

119:143 troubl and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy
command are my delights.

119:144 the righteous of thi testimoni is everlasting: give me
understanding, and I shall live.

119:145 I cri with my whole heart; hear me, O lord: I will keep thy
statutes.

119:146 I cri unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thi testimonies.

119:147 I prevent the dawn of the morning, and cried: I hope in
thi word.

119:148 mine eye prevent the night watches, that I might medit in
thi word.

119:149 hear my voic accord unto thi lovingkindness: O lord,
quicken me accord to thi judgment.

119:150 they draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from
thi law.

119:151 thou art near, O lord; and all thi command are truth.

119:152 concern thi testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast
found them for ever.

119:153 consid mine affliction, and deliv me: for I do not forget
thi law.

119:154 plead my cause, and deliv me: quicken me accord to thy
word.

119:155 salvat is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy
statutes.

119:156 great are thi tender mercies, O lord: quicken me accord to
thi judgments.

119:157 mani are my persecutor and mine enemies; yet do I not decline
from thi testimonies.

119:158 I beheld the transgressors, and wa grieved; becaus they kept
not thi word.

119:159 consid how I love thi precepts: quicken me, O lord,
accord to thi lovingkindness.

119:160 thi word is true from the beginning: and everi one of thy
right judgment endureth for ever.

119:161 princ have persecut me without a cause: but my heart
standeth in awe of thi word.

119:162 I rejoic at thi word, as one that findeth great spoil.

119:163 I hate and abhor lying: but thi law do I love.

119:164 seven time a day do I prais thee becaus of thi righteous
judgments.

119:165 great peac have they which love thi law: and noth shall
offend them.

119:166 lord, I have hope for thi salvation, and done thy
commandments.

119:167 My soul hath kept thi testimonies; and I love them
exceedingly.

119:168 I have kept thi precept and thi testimonies: for all my ways
ar befor thee.

119:169 let my cri come near befor thee, O lord: give me
understand accord to thi word.

119:170 let my supplic come befor thee: deliv me accord to
thi word.

119:171 My lip shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy
statutes.

119:172 My tongu shall speak of thi word: for all thi commandments
ar righteousness.

119:173 let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thi precepts.

119:174 I have long for thi salvation, O lord; and thi law is my
delight.

119:175 let my soul live, and it shall prais thee; and let thy
judg help me.

119:176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thi servant; for i
do not forget thi commandments.



120:1 In my distress I cri unto the lord, and he heard me.

120:2 deliv my soul, O lord, from lie lips, and from a deceitful
tongue.

120:3 what shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee,
thou fals tongue?

120:4 sharp arrow of the mighty, with coal of juniper.

120:5 woe is me, that I sojourn in mesech, that I dwell in the tents
of kedar!

120:6 My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace.

120:7 I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.



121:1 I will lift up mine eye unto the hills, from whenc cometh my
help.

121:2 My help cometh from the lord, which made heaven and earth.

121:3 He will not suffer thi foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee
wil not slumber.

121:4 behold, he that keepeth israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.

121:5 the lord is thi keeper: the lord is thi shade upon thi right
hand.

121:6 the sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.

121:7 the lord shall preserv thee from all evil: he shall preserve
thi soul.

121:8 the lord shall preserv thi go out and thi come in from
thi time forth, and even for evermore.



122:1 I wa glad when they said unto me, let us go into the hous of
th lord.

122:2 our feet shall stand within thi gates, O jerusalem.

122:3 jerusalem is build as a citi that is compact together:

122:4 whither the tribe go up, the tribe of the lord, unto the
testimoni of israel, to give thank unto the name of the lord.

122:5 for there are set throne of judgment, the throne of the house
of david.

122:6 pray for the peac of jerusalem: they shall prosper that love
thee.

122:7 peac be within thi walls, and prosper within thi palaces.

122:8 for my brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say, peac be
within thee.

122:9 becaus of the hous of the lord our god I will seek thi good.



123:1 unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the
heavens.

123:2 behold, as the eye of servant look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eye of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so
our eye wait upon the lord our god, until that he have merci upon us.

123:3 have merci upon us, O lord, have merci upon us: for we are
exceedingli fill with contempt.

123:4 our soul is exceedingli fill with the scorn of those that
ar at ease, and with the contempt of the proud.



124:1 If it had not been the lord who wa on our side, now may israel
say;

124:2 If it had not been the lord who wa on our side, when men rose
up against us:

124:3 then they had swallow us up quick, when their wrath was
kindl against us:

124:4 then the water had overwhelm us, the stream had gone over our
soul:

124:5 then the proud water had gone over our soul.

124:6 bless be the lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their
teeth.

124:7 our soul is escap as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers:
th snare is broken, and we are escaped.

124:8 our help is in the name of the lord, who made heaven and earth.



125:1 they that trust in the lord shall be as mount zion, which cannot
b removed, but abideth for ever.

125:2 As the mountain are round about jerusalem, so the lord is round
about hi peopl from henceforth even for ever.

125:3 for the rod of the wick shall not rest upon the lot of the
righteous; lest the righteou put forth their hand unto iniquity.

125:4 Do good, O lord, unto those that be good, and to them that are
upright in their hearts.

125:5 As for such as turn asid unto their crook ways, the lord
shal lead them forth with the worker of iniquity: but peac shall be
upon israel.



126:1 when the lord turn again the captiv of zion, we were like
them that dream.

126:2 then wa our mouth fill with laughter, and our tongu with
singing: then said they among the heathen, the lord hath done great
th for them.

126:3 the lord hath done great thing for us; whereof we are glad.

126:4 turn again our captivity, O lord, as the stream in the south.

126:5 they that sow in tear shall reap in joy.

126:6 He that goeth forth and weepeth, bear preciou seed, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bring hi sheav with him.



127:1 except the lord build the house, they labour in vain that build
it: except the lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.

127:2 It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the
bread of sorrows: for so he giveth hi belov sleep.

127:3 lo, children are an heritag of the lord: and the fruit of the
womb is hi reward.

127:4 As arrow are in the hand of a mighti man; so are children of
th youth.

127:5 happi is the man that hath hi quiver full of them: they shall
not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemi in the gate.



128:1 bless is everi one that feareth the lord; that walketh in his
ways.

128:2 for thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands: happi shalt thou
be, and it shall be well with thee.

128:3 thi wife shall be as a fruit vine by the side of thine
house: thi children like oliv plant round about thi table.

128:4 behold, that thu shall the man be bless that feareth the
lord.

128:5 the lord shall bless thee out of zion: and thou shalt see the
good of jerusalem all the day of thi life.

128:6 yea, thou shalt see thi children' children, and peac upon
israel.



129:1 mani a time have they afflict me from my youth, may israel now
say:

129:2 mani a time have they afflict me from my youth: yet they have
not prevail against me.

129:3 the plower plow upon my back: they made long their furrows.

129:4 the lord is righteous: he hath cut asund the cord of the
wicked.

129:5 let them all be confound and turn back that hate zion.

129:6 let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withereth
afor it groweth up:

129:7 wherewith the mower filleth not hi hand; nor he that bindeth
sheav hi bosom.

129:8 neither do they which go by say, the bless of the lord be
upon you: we bless you in the name of the lord.



130:1 out of the depth have I cri unto thee, O lord.

130:2 lord, hear my voice: let thine ear be attent to the voic of
mi supplications.

130:3 If thou, lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O lord, who shall
stand?

130:4 but there is forgiv with thee, that thou mayest be feared.

130:5 I wait for the lord, my soul doth wait, and in hi word do i
hope.

130:6 My soul waiteth for the lord more than they that watch for the
morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning.

130:7 let israel hope in the lord: for with the lord there is mercy,
and with him is plenteou redemption.

130:8 and he shall redeem israel from all hi iniquities.



131:1 lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eye lofty: neither do i
exercis myself in great matters, or in thing too high for me.

131:2 sure I have behav and quiet myself, as a child that is
wean of hi mother: my soul is even as a wean child.

131:3 let israel hope in the lord from henceforth and for ever.



132:1 lord, rememb david, and all hi afflictions:

132:2 how he sware unto the lord, and vow unto the mighti god of
jacob;

132:3 sure I will not come into the tabernacl of my house, nor go
up into my bed;

132:4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,

132:5 until I find out a place for the lord, an habit for the
mighti god of jacob.

132:6 lo, we heard of it at ephratah: we found it in the field of the
wood.

132:7 We will go into hi tabernacles: we will worship at his
footstool.

132:8 arise, O lord, into thi rest; thou, and the ark of thi strength.

132:9 let thi priest be cloth with righteousness; and let thy
saint shout for joy.

132:10 for thi servant david' sake turn not away the face of thine
anointed.

132:11 the lord hath sworn in truth unto david; he will not turn from
it; Of the fruit of thi bodi will I set upon thi throne.

132:12 If thi children will keep my coven and my testimoni that i
shal teach them, their children shall also sit upon thi throne for
evermore.

132:13 for the lord hath chosen zion; he hath desir it for his
habitation.

132:14 thi is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired
it.

132:15 I will abundantli bless her provision: I will satisfi her poor
with bread.

132:16 I will also cloth her priest with salvation: and her saints
shal shout aloud for joy.

132:17 there will I make the horn of david to bud: I have ordain a
lamp for mine anointed.

132:18 hi enemi will I cloth with shame: but upon himself shall
hi crown flourish.



133:1 behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
togeth in unity!

133:2 It is like the preciou ointment upon the head, that ran down
upon the beard, even aaron' beard: that went down to the skirt of
hi garments;

133:3 As the dew of hermon, and as the dew that descend upon the
mountain of zion: for there the lord command the blessing, even
lif for evermore.



134:1 behold, bless ye the lord, all ye servant of the lord, which by
night stand in the hous of the lord.

134:2 lift up your hand in the sanctuary, and bless the lord.

134:3 the lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of zion.



135:1 prais ye the lord. prais ye the name of the lord; prais him,
o ye servant of the lord.

135:2 Ye that stand in the hous of the lord, in the court of the
hous of our god.

135:3 prais the lord; for the lord is good: sing prais unto his
name; for it is pleasant.

135:4 for the lord hath chosen jacob unto himself, and israel for his
peculiar treasure.

135:5 for I know that the lord is great, and that our lord is above
al gods.

135:6 whatsoev the lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in
earth, in the seas, and all deep places.

135:7 He causeth the vapour to ascend from the end of the earth; he
maketh lightn for the rain; he bringeth the wind out of his
treasuries.

135:8 who smote the firstborn of egypt, both of man and beast.

135:9 who sent token and wonder into the midst of thee, O egypt,
upon pharaoh, and upon all hi servants.

135:10 who smote great nations, and slew mighti kings;

135:11 sihon king of the amorites, and Og king of bashan, and all the
kingdom of canaan:

135:12 and gave their land for an heritage, an heritag unto israel
hi people.

135:13 thi name, O lord, endureth for ever; and thi memorial, O lord,
throughout all generations.

135:14 for the lord will judg hi people, and he will repent himself
concern hi servants.

135:15 the idol of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's
hands.

135:16 they have mouths, but they speak not; eye have they, but they
se not;

135:17 they have ears, but they hear not; neither is there ani breath
in their mouths.

135:18 they that make them are like unto them: so is everi one that
trusteth in them.

135:19 bless the lord, O hous of israel: bless the lord, O hous of
aaron:

135:20 bless the lord, O hous of levi: ye that fear the lord, bless
th lord.

135:21 bless be the lord out of zion, which dwelleth at jerusalem.

prais ye the lord.



136:1 O give thank unto the lord; for he is good: for hi mercy
endureth for ever.

136:2 O give thank unto the god of gods: for hi merci endureth for
ever.

136:3 O give thank to the lord of lords: for hi merci endureth for
ever.

136:4 To him who alon doeth great wonders: for hi merci endureth for
ever.

136:5 To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for hi merci endureth
for ever.

136:6 To him that stretch out the earth abov the waters: for his
merci endureth for ever.

136:7 To him that made great lights: for hi merci endureth for ever:

136:8 the sun to rule by day: for hi merci endureth for ever:

136:9 the moon and star to rule by night: for hi merci endureth for
ever.

136:10 To him that smote egypt in their firstborn: for hi mercy
endureth for ever:

136:11 and brought out israel from among them: for hi merci endureth
for ever:

136:12 with a strong hand, and with a stretch out arm: for hi mercy
endureth for ever.

136:13 To him which divid the red sea into parts: for hi mercy
endureth for ever:

136:14 and made israel to pass through the midst of it: for hi mercy
endureth for ever:

136:15 but overthrew pharaoh and hi host in the red sea: for his
merci endureth for ever.

136:16 To him which led hi peopl through the wilderness: for his
merci endureth for ever.

136:17 To him which smote great kings: for hi merci endureth for
ever:

136:18 and slew famou kings: for hi merci endureth for ever:

136:19 sihon king of the amorites: for hi merci endureth for ever:

136:20 and Og the king of bashan: for hi merci endureth for ever:

136:21 and gave their land for an heritage: for hi merci endureth for
ever:

136:22 even an heritag unto israel hi servant: for hi mercy
endureth for ever.

136:23 who rememb us in our low estate: for hi merci endureth for
ever:

136:24 and hath redeem us from our enemies: for hi merci endureth
for ever.

136:25 who giveth food to all flesh: for hi merci endureth for ever.

136:26 O give thank unto the god of heaven: for hi merci endureth
for ever.



137:1 By the river of babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when
w rememb zion.

137:2 We hang our harp upon the willow in the midst thereof.

137:3 for there they that carri us away captiv requir of us a
song; and they that wast us requir of us mirth, saying, sing us
on of the song of zion.

137:4 how shall we sing the lord' song in a strang land?

137:5 If I forget thee, O jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning.

137:6 If I do not rememb thee, let my tongu cleav to the roof of
mi mouth; if I prefer not jerusalem abov my chief joy.

137:7 remember, O lord, the children of edom in the day of jerusalem;
who said, rase it, rase it, even to the foundat thereof.

137:8 O daughter of babylon, who art to be destroyed; happi shall he
be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast serv us.

137:9 happi shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thi littl ones
against the stones.



138:1 I will prais thee with my whole heart: befor the god will i
s prais unto thee.

138:2 I will worship toward thi holi temple, and prais thi name for
thi lovingkind and for thi truth: for thou hast magnifi thi word
abov all thi name.

138:3 In the day when I cri thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst
m with strength in my soul.

138:4 all the king of the earth shall prais thee, O lord, when they
hear the word of thi mouth.

138:5 yea, they shall sing in the way of the lord: for great is the
glori of the lord.

138:6 though the lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but
th proud he knoweth afar off.

138:7 though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt reviv me: thou
shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and
thi right hand shall save me.

138:8 the lord will perfect that which concerneth me: thi mercy, o
lord, endureth for ever: forsak not the work of thine own hands.



139:1 O lord, thou hast search me, and known me.

139:2 thou knowest my downsit and mine uprising, thou
understandest my thought afar off.

139:3 thou compassest my path and my lie down, and art acquainted
with all my ways.

139:4 for there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O lord, thou
knowest it altogether.

139:5 thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon
me.

139:6 such knowledg is too wonder for me; it is high, I cannot
attain unto it.

139:7 whither shall I go from thi spirit? or whither shall I flee from
thi presence?

139:8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in
hell, behold, thou art there.

139:9 If I take the wing of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
part of the sea;

139:10 even there shall thi hand lead me, and thi right hand shall
hold me.

139:11 If I say, sure the dark shall cover me; even the night
shal be light about me.

139:12 yea, the dark hideth not from thee; but the night shineth
a the day: the dark and the light are both alik to thee.

139:13 for thou hast possess my reins: thou hast cover me in my
mother' womb.

139:14 I will prais thee; for I am fear and wonder made:
marvel are thi works; and that my soul knoweth right well.

139:15 My substanc wa not hid from thee, when I wa made in secret,
and curious wrought in the lowest part of the earth.

139:16 thine eye did see my substance, yet be unperfect; and in
thi book all my member were written, which in continu were
fashioned, when as yet there wa none of them.

139:17 how preciou also are thi thought unto me, O god! how great is
th sum of them!

139:18 If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand:
when I awake, I am still with thee.

139:19 sure thou wilt slay the wicked, O god: depart from me
therefore, ye bloodi men.

139:20 for they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemi take
thi name in vain.

139:21 Do not I hate them, O lord, that hate thee? and am not i
griev with those that rise up against thee?

139:22 I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.

139:23 search me, O god, and know my heart: tri me, and know my
thoughts:

139:24 and see if there be ani wick way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting.



140:1 deliv me, O lord, from the evil man: preserv me from the
viol man;

140:2 which imagin mischief in their heart; continu are they
gath togeth for war.

140:3 they have sharpen their tongu like a serpent; adders' poison
i under their lips. selah.

140:4 keep me, O lord, from the hand of the wicked; preserv me from
th violent man; who have purpos to overthrow my goings.

140:5 the proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a
net by the wayside; they have set gin for me. selah.

140:6 I said unto the lord, thou art my god: hear the voic of my
supplications, O lord.

140:7 O god the lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered
mi head in the day of battle.

140:8 grant not, O lord, the desir of the wicked: further not his
wick device; lest they exalt themselves. selah.

140:9 As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief
of their own lip cover them.

140:10 let burn coal fall upon them: let them be cast into the
fire; into deep pits, that they rise not up again.

140:11 let not an evil speaker be establish in the earth: evil shall
hunt the violent man to overthrow him.

140:12 I know that the lord will maintain the caus of the afflicted,
and the right of the poor.

140:13 sure the righteou shall give thank unto thi name: the
upright shall dwell in thi presence.



141:1 lord, I cri unto thee: make hast unto me; give ear unto my
voice, when I cri unto thee.

141:2 let my prayer be set forth befor thee as incense; and the
lift up of my hand as the even sacrifice.

141:3 set a watch, O lord, befor my mouth; keep the door of my lips.

141:4 inclin not my heart to ani evil thing, to practis wick works
with men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

141:5 let the righteou smite me; it shall be a kindness: and let him
reprov me; it shall be an excel oil, which shall not break my
head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities.

141:6 when their judg are overthrown in stoni places, they shall
hear my words; for they are sweet.

141:7 our bone are scatter at the grave' mouth, as when one
cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.

141:8 but mine eye are unto thee, O god the lord: in thee is my
trust; leav not my soul destitute.

141:9 keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and the
gin of the worker of iniquity.

141:10 let the wick fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal
escape.



142:1 I cri unto the lord with my voice; with my voic unto the lord
did I make my supplication.

142:2 I pour out my complaint befor him; I shew befor him my
trouble.

142:3 when my spirit wa overwhelm within me, then thou knewest my
path.

in the way wherein I walk have they privili laid a snare for me.

142:4 I look on my right hand, and beheld, but there wa no man that
would know me: refug fail me; no man care for my soul.

142:5 I cri unto thee, O lord: I said, thou art my refug and my
port in the land of the living.

142:6 attend unto my cry; for I am brought veri low: deliv me from
mi persecutors; for they are stronger than i.

142:7 bring my soul out of prison, that I may prais thi name: the
right shall compass me about; for thou shalt deal bounti with
me.



143:1 hear my prayer, O lord, give ear to my supplications: in thy
faith answer me, and in thi righteousness.

143:2 and enter not into judgment with thi servant: for in thi sight
shal no man live be justified.

143:3 for the enemi hath persecut my soul; he hath smitten my life
down to the ground; he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as those
that have been long dead.

143:4 therefor is my spirit overwhelm within me; my heart within me
i desolate.

143:5 I rememb the day of old; I medit on all thi works; I muse
on the work of thi hands.

143:6 I stretch forth my hand unto thee: my soul thirsteth after
thee, as a thirsti land. selah.

143:7 hear me speedily, O lord: my spirit faileth: hide not thi face
from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

143:8 caus me to hear thi lovingkind in the morning; for in thee
do I trust: caus me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift
up my soul unto thee.

143:9 deliv me, O lord, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide
me.

143:10 teach me to do thi will; for thou art my god: thi spirit is
good; lead me into the land of uprightness.

143:11 quicken me, O lord, for thi name' sake: for thi righteousness'
sak bring my soul out of trouble.

143:12 and of thi merci cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them
that afflict my soul: for I am thi servant.



144:1 bless be the lord my strength which teacheth my hand to war,
and my finger to fight:

144:2 My goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my deliverer;
mi shield, and he in whom I trust; who subdueth my peopl under me.

144:3 lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledg of him! or the son
of man, that thou makest account of him!

144:4 man is like to vanity: hi day are as a shadow that passeth
away.

144:5 bow thi heavens, O lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and
they shall smoke.

144:6 cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows,
and destroy them.

144:7 send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliv me out of great
waters, from the hand of strang children;

144:8 whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood.

144:9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O god: upon a psalteri and an
instru of ten string will I sing prais unto thee.

144:10 It is he that giveth salvat unto kings: who delivereth david
hi servant from the hurt sword.

144:11 rid me, and deliv me from the hand of strang children, whose
mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood:

144:12 that our son may be as plant grown up in their youth; that
our daughter may be as corner stones, polish after the similitude
of a palace:

144:13 that our garner may be full, afford all manner of store:
that our sheep may bring forth thousand and ten thousand in our
streets:

144:14 that our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no
break in, nor go out; that there be no complain in our
streets.

144:15 happi is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happi is
that people, whose god is the lord.



145:1 I will extol thee, my god, O king; and I will bless thi name for
ev and ever.

145:2 everi day will I bless thee; and I will prais thi name for ever
and ever.

145:3 great is the lord, and greatli to be praised; and hi greatness
i unsearchable.

145:4 one gener shall prais thi work to another, and shall
declar thi mighti acts.

145:5 I will speak of the gloriou honour of thi majesty, and of thy
wondr works.

145:6 and men shall speak of the might of thi terribl acts: and i
wil declar thi greatness.

145:7 they shall abundantli utter the memori of thi great goodness,
and shall sing of thi righteousness.

145:8 the lord is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and
of great mercy.

145:9 the lord is good to all: and hi tender merci are over all his
works.

145:10 all thi work shall prais thee, O lord; and thi saint shall
bless thee.

145:11 they shall speak of the glori of thi kingdom, and talk of thy
power;

145:12 To make known to the son of men hi mighti acts, and the
glori majesti of hi kingdom.

145:13 thi kingdom is an everlast kingdom, and thi dominion
endureth throughout all generations.

145:14 the lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that
b bow down.

145:15 the eye of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their meat
in due season.

145:16 thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desir of every
liv thing.

145:17 the lord is righteou in all hi ways, and holi in all his
works.

145:18 the lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that
cal upon him in truth.

145:19 He will fulfil the desir of them that fear him: he also will
hear their cry, and will save them.

145:20 the lord preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked
wil he destroy.

145:21 My mouth shall speak the prais of the lord: and let all flesh
bless hi holi name for ever and ever.



146:1 prais ye the lord. prais the lord, O my soul.

146:2 while I live will I prais the lord: I will sing prais unto my
god while I have ani being.

146:3 put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom
ther is no help.

146:4 hi breath goeth forth, he returneth to hi earth; in that very
day hi thought perish.

146:5 happi is he that hath the god of jacob for hi help, whose hope
i in the lord hi god:

146:6 which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is:
which keepeth truth for ever:

146:7 which executeth judgment for the oppressed: which giveth food to
th hungry. the lord looseth the prisoners:

146:8 the lord openeth the eye of the blind: the lord raiseth them
that are bow down: the lord loveth the righteous:

146:9 the lord preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless
and widow: but the way of the wick he turneth upsid down.

146:10 the lord shall reign for ever, even thi god, O zion, unto all
generations. prais ye the lord.



147:1 prais ye the lord: for it is good to sing prais unto our god;
for it is pleasant; and prais is comely.

147:2 the lord doth build up jerusalem: he gathereth togeth the
outcast of israel.

147:3 He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.

147:4 He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their
names.

147:5 great is our lord, and of great power: hi understand is
infinite.

147:6 the lord lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wick down to the
ground.

147:7 sing unto the lord with thanksgiving; sing prais upon the harp
unto our god:

147:8 who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the
earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.

147:9 He giveth to the beast hi food, and to the young raven which
cry.

147:10 He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not
pleasur in the leg of a man.

147:11 the lord taketh pleasur in them that fear him, in those that
hop in hi mercy.

147:12 prais the lord, O jerusalem; prais thi god, O zion.

147:13 for he hath strengthen the bar of thi gates; he hath blessed
thi children within thee.

147:14 He maketh peac in thi borders, and filleth thee with the
finest of the wheat.

147:15 He sendeth forth hi command upon earth: hi word runneth
veri swiftly.

147:16 He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like
ashes.

147:17 He casteth forth hi ice like morsels: who can stand befor his
cold?

147:18 He sendeth out hi word, and melteth them: he causeth hi wind
to blow, and the water flow.

147:19 He sheweth hi word unto jacob, hi statut and hi judgments
unto israel.

147:20 He hath not dealt so with ani nation: and as for hi judgments,
they have not known them. prais ye the lord.



148:1 prais ye the lord. prais ye the lord from the heavens: praise
him in the heights.

148:2 prais ye him, all hi angels: prais ye him, all hi hosts.

148:3 prais ye him, sun and moon: prais him, all ye star of light.

148:4 prais him, ye heaven of heavens, and ye water that be above
th heavens.

148:5 let them prais the name of the lord: for he commanded, and they
wer created.

148:6 He hath also stablish them for ever and ever: he hath made a
decre which shall not pass.

148:7 prais the lord from the earth, ye dragons, and all deeps:

148:8 fire, and hail; snow, and vapours; stormi wind fulfil his
word:

148:9 mountains, and all hills; fruit trees, and all cedars:

148:10 beasts, and all cattle; creep things, and fli fowl:

148:11 king of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judg of
th earth:

148:12 both young men, and maidens; old men, and children:

148:13 let them prais the name of the lord: for hi name alon is
excellent; hi glori is abov the earth and heaven.

148:14 He also exalteth the horn of hi people, the prais of all his
saints; even of the children of israel, a peopl near unto him. praise
y the lord.



149:1 prais ye the lord. sing unto the lord a new song, and his
prais in the congreg of saints.

149:2 let israel rejoic in him that made him: let the children of
zion be joy in their king.

149:3 let them prais hi name in the dance: let them sing praises
unto him with the timbrel and harp.

149:4 for the lord taketh pleasur in hi people: he will beautifi the
meek with salvation.

149:5 let the saint be joy in glory: let them sing aloud upon
their beds.

149:6 let the high prais of god be in their mouth, and a two-edged
sword in their hand;

149:7 To execut vengeanc upon the heathen, and punish upon the
people;

149:8 To bind their king with chains, and their nobl with fetters
of iron;

149:9 To execut upon them the judgment written: thi honour have all
hi saints. prais ye the lord.



150:1 prais ye the lord. prais god in hi sanctuary: prais him in
th firmament of hi power.

150:2 prais him for hi mighti acts: prais him accord to his
excel greatness.

150:3 prais him with the sound of the trumpet: prais him with the
psalteri and harp.

150:4 prais him with the timbrel and dance: prais him with stringed
instru and organs.

150:5 prais him upon the loud cymbals: prais him upon the high
sound cymbals.

150:6 let everi thing that hath breath prais the lord. prais ye the lord.




th proverbs


1:1 the proverb of solomon the son of david, king of israel; 1:2 to
know wisdom and instruction; to perceiv the word of understanding;
1:3 To receiv the instruct of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and
equity; 1:4 To give subtilti to the simple, to the young man knowledge
and discretion.

1:5 A wise man will hear, and will increas learning; and a man of
understand shall attain unto wise counsels: 1:6 To understand a
proverb, and the interpretation; the word of the wise, and their dark
sayings.

1:7 the fear of the lord is the begin of knowledge: but fools
despis wisdom and instruction.

1:8 My son, hear the instruct of thi father, and forsak not the
law of thi mother: 1:9 for they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy
head, and chain about thi neck.

1:10 My son, if sinner entic thee, consent thou not.

1:11 If they say, come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk
privili for the innoc without cause: 1:12 let us swallow them up
al as the grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit:
1:13 We shall find all preciou substance, we shall fill our houses
with spoil: 1:14 cast in thi lot among us; let us all have one purse:
1:15 My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thi foot from
their path: 1:16 for their feet run to evil, and make hast to shed
blood.

1:17 sure in vain the net is spread in the sight of ani bird.

1:18 and they lay wait for their own blood; they lurk privili for
their own lives.

1:19 So are the way of everi one that is greedi of gain; which taketh
away the life of the owner thereof.

1:20 wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voic in the streets:
1:21 she crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the open of
th gates: in the citi she uttereth her words, saying, 1:22 how long,
y simpl ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorner delight in
their scorning, and fool hate knowledge?  1:23 turn you at my
reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known
mi word unto you.

1:24 becaus I have called, and ye refused; I have stretch out my
hand, and no man regarded; 1:25 but ye have set at nought all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof: 1:26 I also will laugh at your
calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh; 1:27 when your fear
cometh as desolation, and your destruct cometh as a whirlwind; when
distress and anguish cometh upon you.

1:28 then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me: 1:29 for that they hated
knowledge, and did not choos the fear of the lord: 1:30 they would
non of my counsel: they despis all my reproof.

1:31 therefor shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be
fil with their own devices.

1:32 for the turn away of the simpl shall slay them, and the
prosper of fool shall destroy them.

1:33 but whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil.

2:1 My son, if thou wilt receiv my words, and hide my commandments
with thee; 2:2 So that thou inclin thine ear unto wisdom, and apply
thin heart to understanding; 2:3 yea, if thou criest after knowledge,
and liftest up thi voic for understanding; 2:4 If thou seekest her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; 2:5 then shalt
thou understand the fear of the lord, and find the knowledg of god.

2:6 for the lord giveth wisdom: out of hi mouth cometh knowledg and
understanding.

2:7 He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to
them that walk uprightly.

2:8 He keepeth the path of judgment, and preserveth the way of his
saints.

2:9 then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and
equity; yea, everi good path.

2:10 when wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledg is pleasant
unto thi soul; 2:11 discret shall preserv thee, understanding
shal keep thee: 2:12 To deliv thee from the way of the evil man,
from the man that speaketh froward things; 2:13 who leav the path of
uprightness, to walk in the way of darkness; 2:14 who rejoic to do
evil, and delight in the froward of the wicked; 2:15 whose ways
ar crooked, and they froward in their paths: 2:16 To deliv thee
from the strang woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with
her words; 2:17 which forsaketh the guid of her youth, and forgetteth
th coven of her god.

2:18 for her hous inclineth unto death, and her path unto the dead.

2:19 none that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
path of life.

2:20 that thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths
of the righteous.

2:21 for the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall
remain in it.

2:22 but the wick shall be cut off from the earth, and the
transgressor shall be root out of it.

3:1 My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my
commandments: 3:2 for length of days, and long life, and peace, shall
they add to thee.

3:3 let not merci and truth forsak thee: bind them about thi neck;
writ them upon the tabl of thine heart: 3:4 So shalt thou find
favour and good understand in the sight of god and man.

3:5 trust in the lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine
own understanding.

3:6 In all thi way acknowledg him, and he shall direct thi paths.

3:7 Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the lord, and depart from
evil.

3:8 It shall be health to thi navel, and marrow to thi bones.

3:9 honour the lord with thi substance, and with the firstfruit of
al thine increase: 3:10 So shall thi barn be fill with plenty, and
thi press shall burst out with new wine.

3:11 My son, despis not the chasten of the lord; neither be weary
of hi correction: 3:12 for whom the lord loveth he correcteth; even
a a father the son in whom he delighteth.

3:13 happi is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth
understanding.

3:14 for the merchandis of it is better than the merchandis of
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.

3:15 she is more preciou than rubies: and all the thing thou canst
desir are not to be compar unto her.

3:16 length of day is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches
and honour.

3:17 her way are way of pleasantness, and all her path are peace.

3:18 she is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy
i everi one that retaineth her.

3:19 the lord by wisdom hath found the earth; by understand hath
h establish the heavens.

3:20 By hi knowledg the depth are broken up, and the cloud drop
down the dew.

3:21 My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom
and discretion: 3:22 So shall they be life unto thi soul, and grace to
thi neck.

3:23 then shalt thou walk in thi way safely, and thi foot shall not
stumble.

3:24 when thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt
li down, and thi sleep shall be sweet.

3:25 Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desol of the
wicked, when it cometh.

3:26 for the lord shall be thi confidence, and shall keep thi foot
from be taken.

3:27 withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
pow of thine hand to do it.

3:28 say not unto thi neighbour, go, and come again, and to morrow i
wil give; when thou hast it by thee.

3:29 devis not evil against thi neighbour, see he dwelleth
secur by thee.

3:30 strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no
harm.

3:31 envi thou not the oppressor, and choos none of hi ways.

3:32 for the froward is abomin to the lord: but hi secret is
with the righteous.

3:33 the curs of the lord is in the hous of the wicked: but he
blesseth the habit of the just.

3:34 sure he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the
lowly.

3:35 the wise shall inherit glory: but shame shall be the promot of
fools.

4:1 hear, ye children, the instruct of a father, and attend to know
understanding.

4:2 for I give you good doctrine, forsak ye not my law.

4:3 for I wa my father' son, tender and onli belov in the sight of
mi mother.

4:4 He taught me also, and said unto me, let thine heart retain my
words: keep my commandments, and live.

4:5 get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither declin from
th word of my mouth.

4:6 forsak her not, and she shall preserv thee: love her, and she
shal keep thee.

4:7 wisdom is the princip thing; therefor get wisdom: and with all
thi get get understanding.

4:8 exalt her, and she shall promot thee: she shall bring thee to
honour, when thou dost embrac her.

4:9 she shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of
glori shall she deliv to thee.

4:10 hear, O my son, and receiv my sayings; and the year of thi life
shal be many.

4:11 I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right
paths.

4:12 when thou goest, thi step shall not be straitened; and when thou
runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

4:13 take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: keep her; for she
i thi life.

4:14 enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of
evil men.

4:15 avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.

4:16 for they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their
sleep is taken away, unless they caus some to fall.

4:17 for they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
violence.

4:18 but the path of the just is as the shine light, that shineth
mor and more unto the perfect day.

4:19 the way of the wick is as darkness: they know not at what they
stumble.

4:20 My son, attend to my words; inclin thine ear unto my sayings.

4:21 let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of
thin heart.

4:22 for they are life unto those that find them, and health to all
their flesh.

4:23 keep thi heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues
of life.

4:24 put away from thee a froward mouth, and pervers lip put far
from thee.

4:25 let thine eye look right on, and let thine eyelid look straight
befor thee.

4:26 ponder the path of thi feet, and let all thi way be established.

4:27 turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remov thi foot from
evil.

5:1 My son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my
understanding: 5:2 that thou mayest regard discretion, and that thy
lip may keep knowledge.

5:3 for the lip of a strang woman drop as an honeycomb, and her
mouth is smoother than oil: 5:4 but her end is bitter as wormwood,
sharp as a two-edg sword.

5:5 her feet go down to death; her step take hold on hell.

5:6 lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her way are
moveable, that thou canst not know them.

5:7 hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the
word of my mouth.

5:8 remov thi way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her
house: 5:9 lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thi year unto
th cruel: 5:10 lest stranger be fill with thi wealth; and thy
labour be in the hous of a stranger; 5:11 and thou mourn at the
last, when thi flesh and thi bodi are consumed, 5:12 and say, how have
i hate instruction, and my heart despis reproof; 5:13 and have not
obey the voic of my teachers, nor inclin mine ear to them that
instruct me!  5:14 I wa almost in all evil in the midst of the
congreg and assembly.

5:15 drink water out of thine own cistern, and run water out of
thin own well.

5:16 let thi fountain be dispers abroad, and river of water in
th streets.

5:17 let them be onli thine own, and not strangers' with thee.

5:18 let thi fountain be blessed: and rejoic with the wife of thy
youth.

5:19 let her be as the love hind and pleasant roe; let her breasts
satisfi thee at all times; and be thou ravish alway with her love.

5:20 and whi wilt thou, my son, be ravish with a strang woman, and
embrac the bosom of a stranger?  5:21 for the way of man are before
th eye of the lord, and he pondereth all hi goings.

5:22 hi own iniqu shall take the wick himself, and he shall be
holden with the cord of hi sins.

5:23 He shall die without instruction; and in the great of his
folli he shall go astray.

6:1 My son, if thou be sureti for thi friend, if thou hast stricken
thi hand with a stranger, 6:2 thou art snare with the word of thy
mouth, thou art taken with the word of thi mouth.

6:3 Do thi now, my son, and deliv thyself, when thou art come into
th hand of thi friend; go, humbl thyself, and make sure thi friend.

6:4 give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.

6:5 deliv thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and as a
bird from the hand of the fowler.

6:6 Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consid her ways, and be wise: 6:7
which have no guide, overseer, or ruler, 6:8 provideth her meat in
th summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.

6:9 how long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when wilt thou aris out of
thi sleep?  6:10 yet a littl sleep, a littl slumber, a little
fold of the hand to sleep: 6:11 So shall thi poverti come as one
that travelleth, and thi want as an arm man.

6:12 A naughti person, a wick man, walketh with a froward mouth.

6:13 He winketh with hi eyes, he speaketh with hi feet, he teacheth
with hi fingers; 6:14 froward is in hi heart, he deviseth
mischief continually; he soweth discord.

6:15 therefor shall hi calam come suddenly; suddenli shall he be
broken without remedy.

6:16 these six thing doth the lord hate: yea, seven are an
abomin unto him: 6:17 A proud look, a lie tongue, and hands
that shed innoc blood, 6:18 An heart that deviseth wicked
imaginations, feet that be swift in run to mischief, 6:19 A false
wit that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.

6:20 My son, keep thi father' commandment, and forsak not the law of
thi mother: 6:21 bind them continu upon thine heart, and tie them
about thi neck.

6:22 when thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall
keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.

6:23 for the command is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs
of instruct are the way of life: 6:24 To keep thee from the evil
woman, from the flatteri of the tongu of a strang woman.

6:25 lust not after her beauti in thine heart; neither let her take
the with her eyelids.

6:26 for by mean of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piec of
bread: and the adultress will hunt for the preciou life.

6:27 can a man take fire in hi bosom, and hi cloth not be burned?
6:28 can one go upon hot coals, and hi feet not be burned?  6:29 so
h that goeth in to hi neighbour' wife; whosoev toucheth her shall
not be innocent.

6:30 men do not despis a thief, if he steal to satisfi hi soul when
h is hungry; 6:31 but if he be found, he shall restor sevenfold; he
shal give all the substanc of hi house.

6:32 but whoso committeth adulteri with a woman lacketh understanding:
h that doeth it destroyeth hi own soul.

6:33 A wound and dishonour shall he get; and hi reproach shall not be
wip away.

6:34 for jealousi is the rage of a man: therefor he will not spare in
th day of vengeance.

6:35 He will not regard ani ransom; neither will he rest content,
though thou givest mani gifts.

7:1 My son, keep my words, and lay up my command with thee.

7:2 keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the appl of thine
eye.

7:3 bind them upon thi fingers, write them upon the tabl of thine
heart.

7:4 say unto wisdom, thou art my sister; and call understand thy
kinswoman: 7:5 that they may keep thee from the strang woman, from
th stranger which flattereth with her words.

7:6 for at the window of my hous I look through my casement, 7:7
and beheld among the simpl ones, I discern among the youths, a
young man void of understanding, 7:8 pass through the street near
her corner; and he went the way to her house, 7:9 In the twilight, in
th evening, in the black and dark night: 7:10 and, behold, there met
him a woman with the attir of an harlot, and subtil of heart.

7:11 (she is loud and stubborn; her feet abid not in her house: 7:12
now is she without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every
corner.)  7:13 So she caught him, and kiss him, and with an impudent
fac said unto him, 7:14 I have peac offer with me; thi day have
i pay my vows.

7:15 therefor came I forth to meet thee, dilig to seek thi face,
and I have found thee.

7:16 I have deck my bed with cover of tapestry, with carved
works, with fine linen of egypt.

7:17 I have perfum my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.

7:18 come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us
solac ourselv with loves.

7:19 for the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey: 7:20
he hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day
appointed.

7:21 with her much fair speech she caus him to yield, with the
flatt of her lip she forc him.

7:22 He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter,
or as a fool to the correct of the stocks; 7:23 till a dart strike
through hi liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not
that it is for hi life.

7:24 hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the
word of my mouth.

7:25 let not thine heart declin to her ways, go not astray in her
paths.

7:26 for she hath cast down mani wounded: yea, mani strong men have
been slain by her.

7:27 her hous is the way to hell, go down to the chamber of
death.

8:1 doth not wisdom cry? and understand put forth her voice?  8:2
she standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the place of
th paths.

8:3 she crieth at the gates, at the entri of the city, at the coming
in at the doors.

8:4 unto you, O men, I call; and my voic is to the son of man.

8:5 O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an
understand heart.

8:6 hear; for I will speak of excel things; and the open of my
lip shall be right things.

8:7 for my mouth shall speak truth; and wicked is an abomination
to my lips.

8:8 all the word of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing
froward or pervers in them.

8:9 they are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them
that find knowledge.

8:10 receiv my instruction, and not silver; and knowledg rather than
choic gold.

8:11 for wisdom is better than rubies; and all the thing that may be
desir are not to be compar to it.

8:12 I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledg of witty
inventions.

8:13 the fear of the lord is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and
th evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate.

8:14 counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding; I have
strength.

8:15 By me king reign, and princ decre justice.

8:16 By me princ rule, and nobles, even all the judg of the earth.

8:17 I love them that love me; and those that seek me earli shall find
me.

8:18 rich and honour are with me; yea, durabl rich and
righteousness.

8:19 My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue
than choic silver.

8:20 I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the path of
judgment: 8:21 that I may caus those that love me to inherit
substance; and I will fill their treasures.

8:22 the lord possess me in the begin of hi way, befor his
work of old.

8:23 I wa set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the
earth was.

8:24 when there were no depths, I wa brought forth; when there were
no fountain abound with water.

8:25 befor the mountain were settled, befor the hill wa I brought
forth: 8:26 while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields,
nor the highest part of the dust of the world.

8:27 when he prepar the heavens, I wa there: when he set a compass
upon the face of the depth: 8:28 when he establish the cloud above:
when he strengthen the fountain of the deep: 8:29 when he gave to
th sea hi decree, that the water should not pass hi commandment:
when he appoint the foundat of the earth: 8:30 then I wa by
him, as one brought up with him: and I wa daili hi delight,
rejo alway befor him; 8:31 rejoic in the habit part of
hi earth; and my delight were with the son of men.

8:32 now therefor hearken unto me, O ye children: for bless are
they that keep my ways.

8:33 hear instruction, and be wise, and refus it not.

8:34 bless is the man that heareth me, watch daili at my gates,
wait at the post of my doors.

8:35 for whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the
lord.

8:36 but he that sinneth against me wrongeth hi own soul: all they
that hate me love death.

9:1 wisdom hath build her house, she hath hewn out her seven
pillars: 9:2 she hath kill her beasts; she hath mingl her wine;
sh hath also furnish her table.

9:3 she hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest
plac of the city, 9:4 whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as
for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 9:5 come, eat of
mi bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.

9:6 forsak the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding.

9:7 He that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame: and he that
rebuketh a wick man getteth himself a blot.

9:8 reprov not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuk a wise man, and
h will love thee.

9:9 give instruct to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a
just man, and he will increas in learning.

9:10 the fear of the lord is the begin of wisdom: and the
knowledg of the holi is understanding.

9:11 for by me thi day shall be multiplied, and the year of thi life
shal be increased.

9:12 If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: but if thou
scornest, thou alon shalt bear it.

9:13 A foolish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth nothing.

9:14 for she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high
plac of the city, 9:15 To call passeng who go right on their
ways: 9:16 whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him
that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 9:17 stolen water are
sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.

9:18 but he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests
ar in the depth of hell.

10:1 the proverb of solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father: but a
foolish son is the heavi of hi mother.

10:2 treasur of wicked profit nothing: but righteousness
delivereth from death.

10:3 the lord will not suffer the soul of the righteou to famish: but
h casteth away the substanc of the wicked.

10:4 He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the hand of
th dilig maketh rich.

10:5 He that gathereth in summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth
in harvest is a son that causeth shame.

10:6 bless are upon the head of the just: but violenc covereth
th mouth of the wicked.

10:7 the memori of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked
shal rot.

10:8 the wise in heart will receiv commandments: but a prate fool
shal fall.

10:9 He that walketh uprightli walketh surely: but he that perverteth
hi way shall be known.

10:10 He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow: but a prate fool
shal fall.

10:11 the mouth of a righteou man is a well of life: but violence
covereth the mouth of the wicked.

10:12 hatr stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins.

10:13 In the lip of him that hath understand wisdom is found: but
a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.

10:14 wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is near
destruction.

10:15 the rich man' wealth is hi strong city: the destruct of the
poor is their poverty.

10:16 the labour of the righteou tendeth to life: the fruit of the
wick to sin.

10:17 He is in the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that
refuseth reproof erreth.

10:18 He that hideth hatr with lie lips, and he that uttereth a
slander, is a fool.

10:19 In the multitud of word there wanteth not sin: but he that
refraineth hi lip is wise.

10:20 the tongu of the just is as choic silver: the heart of the
wick is littl worth.

10:21 the lip of the righteou feed many: but fool die for want of
wisdom.

10:22 the bless of the lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no
sorrow with it.

10:23 It is as sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of
understand hath wisdom.

10:24 the fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the desire
of the righteou shall be granted.

10:25 As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wick no more: but the
right is an everlast foundation.

10:26 As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the
sluggard to them that send him.

10:27 the fear of the lord prolongeth days: but the year of the
wick shall be shortened.

10:28 the hope of the righteou shall be gladness: but the expectation
of the wick shall perish.

10:29 the way of the lord is strength to the upright: but destruction
shal be to the worker of iniquity.

10:30 the righteou shall never be removed: but the wick shall not
inhabit the earth.

10:31 the mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward
tongu shall be cut out.

10:32 the lip of the righteou know what is acceptable: but the mouth
of the wick speaketh frowardness.

11:1 A fals balanc is abomin to the lord: but a just weight is
hi delight.

11:2 when pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowli is
wisdom.

11:3 the integr of the upright shall guid them: but the
pervers of transgressor shall destroy them.

11:4 rich profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness
delivereth from death.

11:5 the righteous of the perfect shall direct hi way: but the
wick shall fall by hi own wickedness.

11:6 the righteous of the upright shall deliv them: but
transgressor shall be taken in their own naughtiness.

11:7 when a wick man dieth, hi expect shall perish: and the
hop of unjust men perisheth.

11:8 the righteou is deliv out of trouble, and the wick cometh
in hi stead.

11:9 An hypocrit with hi mouth destroyeth hi neighbour: but through
knowledg shall the just be delivered.

11:10 when it goeth well with the righteous, the citi rejoiceth: and
when the wick perish, there is shouting.

11:11 By the bless of the upright the citi is exalted: but it is
overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

11:12 He that is void of wisdom despiseth hi neighbour: but a man of
understand holdeth hi peace.

11:13 A talebear revealeth secrets: but he that is of a faithful
spirit concealeth the matter.

11:14 where no counsel is, the peopl fall: but in the multitud of
counsellor there is safety.

11:15 He that is sureti for a stranger shall smart for it: and he that
hateth suretiship is sure.

11:16 A graciou woman retaineth honour: and strong men retain riches.

11:17 the merci man doeth good to hi own soul: but he that is
cruel troubleth hi own flesh.

11:18 the wick worketh a deceit work: but to him that soweth
right shall be a sure reward.

11:19 As righteous tendeth to life: so he that pursueth evil
pursueth it to hi own death.

11:20 they that are of a froward heart are abomin to the lord:
but such as are upright in their way are hi delight.

11:21 though hand join in hand, the wick shall not be unpunished:
but the seed of the righteou shall be delivered.

11:22 As a jewel of gold in a swine' snout, so is a fair woman which
i without discretion.

11:23 the desir of the righteou is onli good: but the expect of
th wick is wrath.

11:24 there is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that
withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty.

11:25 the liber soul shall be made fat: and he that watereth shall
b water also himself.

11:26 He that withholdeth corn, the peopl shall curs him: but
bless shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.

11:27 He that dilig seeketh good procureth favour: but he that
seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him.

11:28 He that trusteth in hi rich shall fall; but the righteous
shal flourish as a branch.

11:29 He that troubleth hi own hous shall inherit the wind: and the
fool shall be servant to the wise of heart.

11:30 the fruit of the righteou is a tree of life; and he that
winneth soul is wise.

11:31 behold, the righteou shall be recompens in the earth: much
mor the wick and the sinner.

12:1 whoso loveth instruct loveth knowledge: but he that hateth
reproof is brutish.

12:2 A good man obtaineth favour of the lord: but a man of wicked
devic will he condemn.

12:3 A man shall not be establish by wickedness: but the root of the
right shall not be moved.

12:4 A virtuou woman is a crown to her husband: but she that maketh
asham is as rotten in hi bones.

12:5 the thought of the righteou are right: but the counsel of the
wick are deceit.

12:6 the word of the wick are to lie in wait for blood: but the
mouth of the upright shall deliv them.

12:7 the wick are overthrown, and are not: but the hous of the
right shall stand.

12:8 A man shall be commend accord to hi wisdom: but he that is
of a pervers heart shall be despised.

12:9 He that is despised, and hath a servant, is better than he that
honoureth himself, and lacketh bread.

12:10 A righteou man regardeth the life of hi beast: but the tender
merci of the wick are cruel.

12:11 He that tilleth hi land shall be satisfi with bread: but he
that followeth vain person is void of understanding.

12:12 the wick desireth the net of evil men: but the root of the
right yieldeth fruit.

12:13 the wick is snare by the transgress of hi lips: but the
just shall come out of trouble.

12:14 A man shall be satisfi with good by the fruit of hi mouth:
and the recomp of a man' hand shall be render unto him.

12:15 the way of a fool is right in hi own eyes: but he that
hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.

12:16 A fool' wrath is present known: but a prudent man covereth
shame.

12:17 He that speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness: but a false
wit deceit.

12:18 there is that speaketh like the pierc of a sword: but the
tongu of the wise is health.

12:19 the lip of truth shall be establish for ever: but a lying
tongu is but for a moment.

12:20 deceit is in the heart of them that imagin evil: but to the
counsellor of peac is joy.

12:21 there shall no evil happen to the just: but the wick shall be
fil with mischief.

12:22 ly lip are abomin to the lord: but they that deal truly
ar hi delight.

12:23 A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools
proclaimeth foolishness.

12:24 the hand of the dilig shall bear rule: but the sloth shall
b under tribute.

12:25 heavi in the heart of man maketh it stoop: but a good word
maketh it glad.

12:26 the righteou is more excel than hi neighbour: but the way
of the wick seduceth them.

12:27 the sloth man roasteth not that which he took in hunting: but
th substanc of a dilig man is precious.

12:28 In the way of righteous is life: and in the pathway thereof
ther is no death.

13:1 A wise son heareth hi father' instruction: but a scorner
heareth not rebuke.

13:2 A man shall eat good by the fruit of hi mouth: but the soul of
th transgressor shall eat violence.

13:3 He that keepeth hi mouth keepeth hi life: but he that openeth
wid hi lip shall have destruction.

13:4 the soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing: but the soul
of the dilig shall be made fat.

13:5 A righteou man hateth lying: but a wick man is loathsome, and
cometh to shame.

13:6 righteous keepeth him that is upright in the way: but
wicked overthroweth the sinner.

13:7 there is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing: there is
that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches.

13:8 the ransom of a man' life are hi riches: but the poor heareth
not rebuke.

13:9 the light of the righteou rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked
shal be put out.

13:10 onli by pride cometh contention: but with the well advis is
wisdom.

13:11 wealth gotten by vaniti shall be diminished: but he that
gathereth by labour shall increase.

13:12 hope defer maketh the heart sick: but when the desir cometh,
it is a tree of life.

13:13 whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he that feareth
th command shall be rewarded.

13:14 the law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the
snar of death.

13:15 good understand giveth favour: but the way of transgressors
i hard.

13:16 everi prudent man dealeth with knowledge: but a fool layeth open
hi folly.

13:17 A wick messeng falleth into mischief: but a faithful
ambassador is health.

13:18 poverti and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction: but
h that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.

13:19 the desir accomplish is sweet to the soul: but it is
abomin to fool to depart from evil.

13:20 He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a companion of
fool shall be destroyed.

13:21 evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteou good shall be
repayed.

13:22 A good man leaveth an inherit to hi children' children:
and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.

13:23 much food is in the tillag of the poor: but there is that is
destroy for want of judgment.

13:24 He that spareth hi rod hateth hi son: but he that loveth him
chasteneth him betimes.

13:25 the righteou eateth to the satisfi of hi soul: but the
belli of the wick shall want.

14:1 everi wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it
down with her hands.

14:2 He that walketh in hi upright feareth the lord: but he that
i pervers in hi way despiseth him.

14:3 In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride: but the lip of
th wise shall preserv them.

14:4 where no oxen are, the crib is clean: but much increas is by the
strength of the ox.

14:5 A faith wit will not lie: but a fals wit will utter
lies.

14:6 A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not: but knowledg is
easi unto him that understandeth.

14:7 Go from the presenc of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not
in him the lip of knowledge.

14:8 the wisdom of the prudent is to understand hi way: but the folly
of fool is deceit.

14:9 fool make a mock at sin: but among the righteou there is
favour.

14:10 the heart knoweth hi own bitterness; and a stranger doth not
intermeddl with hi joy.

14:11 the hous of the wick shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle
of the upright shall flourish.

14:12 there is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the way of death.

14:13 even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that
mirth is heaviness.

14:14 the backslid in heart shall be fill with hi own ways: and a
good man shall be satisfi from himself.

14:15 the simpl believeth everi word: but the prudent man looketh
wel to hi going.

14:16 A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fool
rageth, and is confident.

14:17 He that is soon angri dealeth foolishly: and a man of wicked
devic is hated.

14:18 the simpl inherit folly: but the prudent are crown with
knowledge.

14:19 the evil bow befor the good; and the wick at the gate of the
righteous.

14:20 the poor is hate even of hi own neighbour: but the rich hath
mani friends.

14:21 He that despiseth hi neighbour sinneth: but he that hath mercy
on the poor, happi is he.

14:22 Do they not err that devis evil? but merci and truth shall be
to them that devis good.

14:23 In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lip tendeth
onli to penury.

14:24 the crown of the wise is their riches: but the foolish of
fool is folly.

14:25 A true wit delivereth souls: but a deceit witness
speaketh lies.

14:26 In the fear of the lord is strong confidence: and hi children
shal have a place of refuge.

14:27 the fear of the lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the
snar of death.

14:28 In the multitud of peopl is the king' honour: but in the want
of peopl is the destruct of the prince.

14:29 He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that
i hasti of spirit exalteth folly.

14:30 A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but envi the rottenness
of the bones.

14:31 He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth hi maker: but he that
honoureth him hath merci on the poor.

14:32 the wick is driven away in hi wickedness: but the righteous
hath hope in hi death.

14:33 wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but
that which is in the midst of fool is made known.

14:34 righteous exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any
people.

14:35 the king' favour is toward a wise servant: but hi wrath is
against him that causeth shame.

15:1 A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievou word stir up
anger.

15:2 the tongu of the wise useth knowledg aright: but the mouth of
fool poureth out foolishness.

15:3 the eye of the lord are in everi place, behold the evil and
th good.

15:4 A wholesom tongu is a tree of life: but pervers therein is
a breach in the spirit.

15:5 A fool despiseth hi father' instruction: but he that regardeth
reproof is prudent.

15:6 In the hous of the righteou is much treasure: but in the
revenu of the wick is trouble.

15:7 the lip of the wise dispers knowledge: but the heart of the
foolish doeth not so.

15:8 the sacrific of the wick is an abomin to the lord: but
th prayer of the upright is hi delight.

15:9 the way of the wick is an abomin unto the lord: but he
loveth him that followeth after righteousness.

15:10 correct is grievou unto him that forsaketh the way: and he
that hateth reproof shall die.

15:11 hell and destruct are befor the lord: how much more then the
heart of the children of men?  15:12 A scorner loveth not one that
reproveth him: neither will he go unto the wise.

15:13 A merri heart maketh a cheer countenance: but by sorrow of
th heart the spirit is broken.

15:14 the heart of him that hath understand seeketh knowledge: but
th mouth of fool feedeth on foolishness.

15:15 all the day of the afflict are evil: but he that is of a
merri heart hath a continu feast.

15:16 better is littl with the fear of the lord than great treasure
and troubl therewith.

15:17 better is a dinner of herb where love is, than a stall ox and
hatr therewith.

15:18 A wrath man stirreth up strife: but he that is slow to anger
appeaseth strife.

15:19 the way of the sloth man is as an hedg of thorns: but the
way of the righteou is made plain.

15:20 A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his
mother.

15:21 folli is joy to him that is destitut of wisdom: but a man of
understand walketh uprightly.

15:22 without counsel purpos are disappointed: but in the multitude
of counsellor they are established.

15:23 A man hath joy by the answer of hi mouth: and a word spoken in
du season, how good is it!  15:24 the way of life is abov to the
wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.

15:25 the lord will destroy the hous of the proud: but he will
establish the border of the widow.

15:26 the thought of the wick are an abomin to the lord: but
th word of the pure are pleasant words.

15:27 He that is greedi of gain troubleth hi own house; but he that
hateth gift shall live.

15:28 the heart of the righteou studieth to answer: but the mouth of
th wick poureth out evil things.

15:29 the lord is far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of
th righteous.

15:30 the light of the eye rejoiceth the heart: and a good report
maketh the bone fat.

15:31 the ear that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the wise.

15:32 He that refuseth instruct despiseth hi own soul: but he that
heareth reproof getteth understanding.

15:33 the fear of the lord is the instruct of wisdom; and before
honour is humility.

16:1 the prepar of the heart in man, and the answer of the
tongue, is from the lord.

16:2 all the way of a man are clean in hi own eyes; but the lord
weigheth the spirits.

16:3 commit thi work unto the lord, and thi thought shall be
established.

16:4 the lord hath made all thing for himself: yea, even the wicked
for the day of evil.

16:5 everi one that is proud in heart is an abomin to the lord:
though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.

16:6 By merci and truth iniqu is purged: and by the fear of the
lord men depart from evil.

16:7 when a man' way pleas the lord, he maketh even hi enemi to
b at peac with him.

16:8 better is a littl with righteous than great revenu without
right.

16:9 A man' heart deviseth hi way: but the lord directeth hi steps.

16:10 A divin sentenc is in the lip of the king: hi mouth
transgresseth not in judgment.

16:11 A just weight and balanc are the lord's: all the weight of the
bag are hi work.

16:12 It is an abomin to king to commit wickedness: for the
thron is establish by righteousness.

16:13 righteou lip are the delight of kings; and they love him that
speaketh right.

16:14 the wrath of a king is as messeng of death: but a wise man
wil pacifi it.

16:15 In the light of the king' counten is life; and hi favour
i as a cloud of the latter rain.

16:16 how much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get
understand rather to be chosen than silver!  16:17 the highway of
th upright is to depart from evil: he that keepeth hi way preserveth
hi soul.

16:18 pride goeth befor destruction, and an haughti spirit befor a
fall.

16:19 better it is to be of an humbl spirit with the lowly, than to
divid the spoil with the proud.

16:20 He that handleth a matter wise shall find good: and whoso
trusteth in the lord, happi is he.

16:21 the wise in heart shall be call prudent: and the sweet of
th lip increaseth learning.

16:22 understand is a wellspr of life unto him that hath it: but
th instruct of fool is folly.

16:23 the heart of the wise teacheth hi mouth, and addeth learn to
hi lips.

16:24 pleasant word are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and
health to the bones.

16:25 there is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the way of death.

16:26 He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for hi mouth craveth
it of him.

16:27 An ungodli man diggeth up evil: and in hi lip there is as a
burn fire.

16:28 A froward man soweth strife: and a whisper separateth chief
friends.

16:29 A violent man enticeth hi neighbour, and leadeth him into the
way that is not good.

16:30 He shutteth hi eye to devis froward things: move hi lips
h bringeth evil to pass.

16:31 the hoari head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.

16:32 He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that
ruleth hi spirit than he that taketh a city.

16:33 the lot is cast into the lap; but the whole dispos thereof is
of the lord.

17:1 better is a dri morsel, and quiet therewith, than an house
ful of sacrific with strife.

17:2 A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame, and
shal have part of the inherit among the brethren.

17:3 the fine pot is for silver, and the furnac for gold: but the
lord trieth the hearts.

17:4 A wick doer giveth heed to fals lips; and a liar giveth ear to
a naughti tongue.

17:5 whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth hi maker: and he that is glad
at calam shall not be unpunished.

17:6 children' children are the crown of old men; and the glori of
children are their fathers.

17:7 excel speech becometh not a fool: much less do lie lip a
prince.

17:8 A gift is as a preciou stone in the eye of him that hath it:
whithersoev it turneth, it prospereth.

17:9 He that covereth a transgress seeketh love; but he that
repeateth a matter separateth veri friends.

17:10 A reproof entereth more into a wise man than an hundr stripes
into a fool.

17:11 An evil man seeketh onli rebellion: therefor a cruel messenger
shal be sent against him.

17:12 let a bear rob of her whelp meet a man, rather than a fool
in hi folly.

17:13 whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his
house.

17:14 the begin of strife is as when one letteth out water:
therefor leav off contention, befor it be meddl with.

17:15 He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just,
even they both are abomin to the lord.

17:16 wherefor is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom,
se he hath no heart to it?  17:17 A friend loveth at all times,
and a brother is born for adversity.

17:18 A man void of understand striketh hands, and becometh surety
in the presenc of hi friend.

17:19 He loveth transgress that loveth strife: and he that exalteth
hi gate seeketh destruction.

17:20 He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that hath a
pervers tongu falleth into mischief.

17:21 He that begetteth a fool doeth it to hi sorrow: and the father
of a fool hath no joy.

17:22 A merri heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit
drieth the bones.

17:23 A wick man taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways
of judgment.

17:24 wisdom is befor him that hath understanding; but the eye of a
fool are in the end of the earth.

17:25 A foolish son is a grief to hi father, and bitter to her
that bare him.

17:26 also to punish the just is not good, nor to strike princ for
equity.

17:27 He that hath knowledg spareth hi words: and a man of
understand is of an excel spirit.

17:28 even a fool, when he holdeth hi peace, is count wise: and he
that shutteth hi lip is esteem a man of understanding.

18:1 through desir a man, have separ himself, seeketh and
intermeddleth with all wisdom.

18:2 A fool hath no delight in understanding, but that hi heart may
discov itself.

18:3 when the wick cometh, then cometh also contempt, and with
ignomini reproach.

18:4 the word of a man' mouth are as deep waters, and the wellspring
of wisdom as a flow brook.

18:5 It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow
th righteou in judgment.

18:6 A fool' lip enter into contention, and hi mouth calleth for
strokes.

18:7 A fool' mouth is hi destruction, and hi lip are the snare of
hi soul.

18:8 the word of a talebear are as wounds, and they go down into
th innermost part of the belly.

18:9 He also that is sloth in hi work is brother to him that is a
great waster.

18:10 the name of the lord is a strong tower: the righteou runneth
into it, and is safe.

18:11 the rich man' wealth is hi strong city, and as an high wall in
hi own conceit.

18:12 befor destruct the heart of man is haughty, and before
honour is humility.

18:13 He that answereth a matter befor he heareth it, it is folli and
sham unto him.

18:14 the spirit of a man will sustain hi infirmity; but a wounded
spirit who can bear?  18:15 the heart of the prudent getteth
knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.

18:16 A man' gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him befor great
men.

18:17 He that is first in hi own caus seemeth just; but his
neighbour cometh and searcheth him.

18:18 the lot causeth content to cease, and parteth between the
mighty.

18:19 A brother offend is harder to be won than a strong city: and
their content are like the bar of a castle.

18:20 A man' belli shall be satisfi with the fruit of hi mouth;
and with the increas of hi lip shall he be filled.

18:21 death and life are in the power of the tongue: and they that
lov it shall eat the fruit thereof.

18:22 whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour
of the lord.

18:23 the poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly.

18:24 A man that hath friend must shew himself friendly: and there is
a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.

19:1 better is the poor that walketh in hi integrity, than he that is
pervers in hi lips, and is a fool.

19:2 also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good; and he
that hasteth with hi feet sinneth.

19:3 the foolish of man perverteth hi way: and hi heart fretteth
against the lord.

19:4 wealth maketh mani friends; but the poor is separ from his
neighbour.

19:5 A fals wit shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh
li shall not escape.

19:6 mani will intreat the favour of the prince: and everi man is a
friend to him that giveth gifts.

19:7 all the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his
friend go far from him? he pursueth them with words, yet they are
w to him.

19:8 He that getteth wisdom loveth hi own soul: he that keepeth
understand shall find good.

19:9 A fals wit shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh
li shall perish.

19:10 delight is not seemli for a fool; much less for a servant to
hav rule over princes.

19:11 the discret of a man deferreth hi anger; and it is hi glory
to pass over a transgression.

19:12 the king' wrath is as the roar of a lion; but hi favour is
a dew upon the grass.

19:13 A foolish son is the calam of hi father: and the contentions
of a wife are a continu dropping.

19:14 hous and rich are the inherit of fathers: and a prudent
wif is from the lord.

19:15 sloth casteth into a deep sleep; and an idl soul shall
suff hunger.

19:16 He that keepeth the command keepeth hi own soul; but he
that despiseth hi way shall die.

19:17 He that hath piti upon the poor lendeth unto the lord; and that
which he hath given will he pay him again.

19:18 chasten thi son while there is hope, and let not thi soul spare
for hi crying.

19:19 A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou
deliv him, yet thou must do it again.

19:20 hear counsel, and receiv instruction, that thou mayest be wise
in thi latter end.

19:21 there are mani devic in a man' heart; nevertheless the
counsel of the lord, that shall stand.

19:22 the desir of a man is hi kindness: and a poor man is better
than a liar.

19:23 the fear of the lord tendeth to life: and he that hath it shall
abid satisfied; he shall not be visit with evil.

19:24 A sloth man hideth hi hand in hi bosom, and will not so
much as bring it to hi mouth again.

19:25 smite a scorner, and the simpl will beware: and reprov one
that hath understanding, and he will understand knowledge.

19:26 He that wasteth hi father, and chaseth away hi mother, is a
son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.

19:27 cease, my son, to hear the instruct that causeth to err from
th word of knowledge.

19:28 An ungodli wit scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the
wick devoureth iniquity.

19:29 judgment are prepar for scorners, and stripe for the back of
fools.

20:1 wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoev is
deceiv therebi is not wise.

20:2 the fear of a king is as the roar of a lion: whoso provoketh
him to anger sinneth against hi own soul.

20:3 It is an honour for a man to ceas from strife: but everi fool
wil be meddling.

20:4 the sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; therefor shall
h beg in harvest, and have nothing.

20:5 counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; but a man of
understand will draw it out.

20:6 most men will proclaim everi one hi own goodness: but a faithful
man who can find?  20:7 the just man walketh in hi integrity: his
children are bless after him.

20:8 A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away all
evil with hi eyes.

20:9 who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
20:10 diver weights, and diver measures, both of them are alike
abomin to the lord.

20:11 even a child is known by hi doings, whether hi work be pure,
and whether it be right.

20:12 the hear ear, and the see eye, the lord hath made even
both of them.

20:13 love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and
thou shalt be satisfi with bread.

20:14 It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone
hi way, then he boasteth.

20:15 there is gold, and a multitud of rubies: but the lip of
knowledg are a preciou jewel.

20:16 take hi garment that is sureti for a stranger: and take a
pledg of him for a strang woman.

20:17 bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but afterward hi mouth
shal be fill with gravel.

20:18 everi purpos is establish by counsel: and with good advice
mak war.

20:19 He that goeth about as a talebear revealeth secrets: therefore
meddl not with him that flattereth with hi lips.

20:20 whoso curseth hi father or hi mother, hi lamp shall be put
out in obscur darkness.

20:21 An inherit may be gotten hastili at the beginning; but the
end thereof shall not be blessed.

20:22 say not thou, I will recompens evil; but wait on the lord, and
h shall save thee.

20:23 diver weight are an abomin unto the lord; and a false
bal is not good.

20:24 man' go are of the lord; how can a man then understand his
own way?  20:25 It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is
holy, and after vow to make enquiry.

20:26 A wise king scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheel over
them.

20:27 the spirit of man is the candl of the lord, search all the
inward part of the belly.

20:28 merci and truth preserv the king: and hi throne is upholden by
mercy.

20:29 the glori of young men is their strength: and the beauti of old
men is the grey head.

20:30 the blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: so do stripe the
inward part of the belly.

21:1 the king' heart is in the hand of the lord, as the river of
water: he turneth it whithersoev he will.

21:2 everi way of a man is right in hi own eyes: but the lord
pondereth the hearts.

21:3 To do justic and judgment is more accept to the lord than
sacrifice.

21:4 An high look, and a proud heart, and the plow of the wicked,
i sin.

21:5 the thought of the dilig tend onli to plenteousness; but of
everi one that is hasti onli to want.

21:6 the get of treasur by a lie tongu is a vaniti toss to
and fro of them that seek death.

21:7 the robberi of the wick shall destroy them; becaus they refuse
to do judgment.

21:8 the way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his
work is right.

21:9 It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a
brawl woman in a wide house.

21:10 the soul of the wick desireth evil: hi neighbour findeth no
favour in hi eyes.

21:11 when the scorner is punished, the simpl is made wise: and when
th wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.

21:12 the righteou man wise considereth the hous of the wicked:
but god overthroweth the wick for their wickedness.

21:13 whoso stoppeth hi ear at the cri of the poor, he also shall
cri himself, but shall not be heard.

21:14 A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom
strong wrath.

21:15 It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruct shall be
to the worker of iniquity.

21:16 the man that wandereth out of the way of understand shall
remain in the congreg of the dead.

21:17 He that loveth pleasur shall be a poor man: he that loveth wine
and oil shall not be rich.

21:18 the wick shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the
transgressor for the upright.

21:19 It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious
and an angri woman.

21:20 there is treasur to be desir and oil in the dwell of the
wise; but a foolish man spendeth it up.

21:21 He that followeth after righteous and merci findeth life,
righteousness, and honour.

21:22 A wise man scaleth the citi of the mighty, and casteth down the
strength of the confid thereof.

21:23 whoso keepeth hi mouth and hi tongu keepeth hi soul from
troubles.

21:24 proud and haughti scorner is hi name, who dealeth in proud
wrath.

21:25 the desir of the sloth killeth him; for hi hand refus to
labour.

21:26 He coveteth greedili all the day long: but the righteou giveth
and spareth not.

21:27 the sacrific of the wick is abomination: how much more, when
h bringeth it with a wick mind?  21:28 A fals wit shall
perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly.

21:29 A wick man hardeneth hi face: but as for the upright, he
directeth hi way.

21:30 there is no wisdom nor understand nor counsel against the
lord.

21:31 the hors is prepar against the day of battle: but safeti is
of the lord.

22:1 A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving
favour rather than silver and gold.

22:2 the rich and poor meet together: the lord is the maker of them
all.

22:3 A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the
simpl pass on, and are punished.

22:4 By humil and the fear of the lord are riches, and honour, and
life.

22:5 thorn and snare are in the way of the froward: he that doth
keep hi soul shall be far from them.

22:6 train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he
wil not depart from it.

22:7 the rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrow is servant to the
lender.

22:8 He that soweth iniqu shall reap vanity: and the rod of his
ang shall fail.

22:9 He that hath a bounti eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of
hi bread to the poor.

22:10 cast out the scorner, and content shall go out; yea, strife
and reproach shall cease.

22:11 He that loveth pure of heart, for the grace of hi lip the
k shall be hi friend.

22:12 the eye of the lord preserv knowledge, and he overthroweth the
word of the transgressor.

22:13 the sloth man saith, there is a lion without, I shall be
slain in the streets.

22:14 the mouth of strang women is a deep pit: he that is abhor of
th lord shall fall therein.

22:15 foolish is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of
correct shall drive it far from him.

22:16 He that oppresseth the poor to increas hi riches, and he that
giveth to the rich, shall sure come to want.

22:17 bow down thine ear, and hear the word of the wise, and apply
thin heart unto my knowledge.

22:18 for it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they
shal withal be fit in thi lips.

22:19 that thi trust may be in the lord, I have made known to thee
thi day, even to thee.

22:20 have not I written to thee excel thing in counsel and
knowledge, 22:21 that I might make thee know the certainti of the
word of truth; that thou mightest answer the word of truth to them
that send unto thee?  22:22 rob not the poor, becaus he is poor:
neith oppress the afflict in the gate: 22:23 for the lord will
plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoil them.

22:24 make no friendship with an angri man; and with a furiou man
thou shalt not go: 22:25 lest thou learn hi ways, and get a snare to
thi soul.

22:26 Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are
sureti for debts.

22:27 If thou hast noth to pay, whi should he take away thi bed
from under thee?  22:28 remov not the ancient landmark, which thy
fath have set.

22:29 seest thou a man dilig in hi business? he shall stand before
kings; he shall not stand befor mean men.

23:1 when thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consid dilig what
i befor thee: 23:2 and put a knife to thi throat, if thou be a man
given to appetite.

23:3 Be not desir of hi dainties: for they are deceit meat.

23:4 labour not to be rich: ceas from thine own wisdom.

23:5 wilt thou set thine eye upon that which is not? for riches
certainli make themselv wings; they fli away as an eagl toward
heaven.

23:6 eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither
desir thou hi dainti meats: 23:7 for as he thinketh in hi heart, so
i he: eat and drink, saith he to thee; but hi heart is not with
thee.

23:8 the morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose
thi sweet words.

23:9 speak not in the ear of a fool: for he will despis the wisdom
of thi words.

23:10 remov not the old landmark; and enter not into the field of
th fatherless: 23:11 for their redeem is mighty; he shall plead
their caus with thee.

23:12 appli thine heart unto instruction, and thine ear to the words
of knowledge.

23:13 withhold not correct from the child: for if thou beatest him
with the rod, he shall not die.

23:14 thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliv hi soul
from hell.

23:15 My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even
mine.

23:16 yea, my rein shall rejoice, when thi lip speak right things.

23:17 let not thine heart envi sinners: but be thou in the fear of the
lord all the day long.

23:18 for sure there is an end; and thine expect shall not be
cut off.

23:19 hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guid thine heart in the
way.

23:20 Be not among winebibbers; among riotou eater of flesh: 23:21
for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness
shal cloth a man with rags.

23:22 hearken unto thi father that begat thee, and despis not thy
moth when she is old.

23:23 buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction,
and understanding.

23:24 the father of the righteou shall greatli rejoice: and he that
begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him.

23:25 thi father and thi mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
shal rejoice.

23:26 My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eye observ my ways.

23:27 for a whore is a deep ditch; and a strang woman is a narrow
pit.

23:28 she also lieth in wait as for a prey, and increaseth the
transgressor among men.

23:29 who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath
babbling? who hath wound without cause? who hath red of eyes?
23:30 they that tarri long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed
wine.

23:31 look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his
colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.

23:32 At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an
adder.

23:33 thine eye shall behold strang women, and thine heart shall
utt pervers things.

23:34 yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the
sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.

23:35 they have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I wa not sick; they
hav beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it
yet again.

24:1 Be not thou enviou against evil men, neither desir to be with
them.

24:2 for their heart studieth destruction, and their lip talk of
mischief.

24:3 through wisdom is an hous builded; and by understand it is
established: 24:4 and by knowledg shall the chamber be fill with
al preciou and pleasant riches.

24:5 A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledg increaseth
strength.

24:6 for by wise counsel thou shalt make thi war: and in multitud of
counsellor there is safety.

24:7 wisdom is too high for a fool: he openeth not hi mouth in the
gate.

24:8 He that deviseth to do evil shall be call a mischiev person.

24:9 the thought of foolish is sin: and the scorner is an
abomin to men.

24:10 If thou faint in the day of adversity, thi strength is small.

24:11 If thou forbear to deliv them that are drawn unto death, and
thos that are readi to be slain; 24:12 If thou sayest, behold, we
knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consid it? and he
that keepeth thi soul, doth not he know it? and shall not he render to
everi man accord to hi works?  24:13 My son, eat thou honey,
becaus it is good; and the honeycomb, which is sweet to thi taste:
24:14 So shall the knowledg of wisdom be unto thi soul: when thou
hast found it, then there shall be a reward, and thi expect shall
not be cut off.

24:15 lay not wait, O wick man, against the dwell of the
righteous; spoil not hi rest place: 24:16 for a just man falleth
seven times, and riseth up again: but the wick shall fall into
mischief.

24:17 rejoic not when thine enemi falleth, and let not thine heart be
glad when he stumbleth: 24:18 lest the lord see it, and it displease
him, and he turn away hi wrath from him.

24:19 fret not thyself becaus of evil men, neither be thou enviou at
th wicked: 24:20 for there shall be no reward to the evil man; the
candl of the wick shall be put out.

24:21 My son, fear thou the lord and the king: and meddl not with
them that are given to change: 24:22 for their calam shall rise
suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both?  24:23 these things
also belong to the wise. It is not good to have respect of person in
judgment.

24:24 He that saith unto the wicked, thou are righteous; him shall the
peopl curse, nation shall abhor him: 24:25 but to them that rebuke
him shall be delight, and a good bless shall come upon them.

24:26 everi man shall kiss hi lip that giveth a right answer.

24:27 prepar thi work without, and make it fit for thyself in the
field; and afterward build thine house.

24:28 Be not a wit against thi neighbour without cause; and
dec not with thi lips.

24:29 say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: I will
rend to the man accord to hi work.

24:30 I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the
man void of understanding; 24:31 and, lo, it wa all grown over with
thorns, and nettl had cover the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof wa broken down.

24:32 then I saw, and consid it well: I look upon it, and
receiv instruction.

24:33 yet a littl sleep, a littl slumber, a littl fold of the
hand to sleep: 24:34 So shall thi poverti come as one that
travelleth; and thi want as an arm man.

25:1 these are also proverb of solomon, which the men of hezekiah
k of judah copi out.

25:2 It is the glori of god to conceal a thing: but the honour of
k is to search out a matter.

25:3 the heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of
k is unsearchable.

25:4 take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer.

25:5 take away the wick from befor the king, and hi throne shall
b establish in righteousness.

25:6 put not forth thyself in the presenc of the king, and stand not
in the place of great men: 25:7 for better it is that it be said unto
thee, come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the
pres of the princ whom thine eye have seen.

25:8 Go not forth hastili to strive, lest thou know not what to do in
th end thereof, when thi neighbour hath put thee to shame.

25:9 debat thi caus with thi neighbour himself; and discov not a
secret to another: 25:10 lest he that heareth it put thee to shame,
and thine infami turn not away.

25:11 A word fitli spoken is like appl of gold in pictur of
silver.

25:12 As an ear of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a
wis reprov upon an obedi ear.

25:13 As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful
messeng to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his
masters.

25:14 whoso boasteth himself of a fals gift is like cloud and wind
without rain.

25:15 By long forbear is a princ persuaded, and a soft tongue
breaketh the bone.

25:16 hast thou found honey? eat so much as is suffici for thee,
lest thou be fill therewith, and vomit it.

25:17 withdraw thi foot from thi neighbour' house; lest he be weary
of thee, and so hate thee.

25:18 A man that beareth fals wit against hi neighbour is a
maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.

25:19 confid in an unfaith man in time of troubl is like a
broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.

25:20 As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar
upon nitre, so is he that singeth song to an heavi heart.

25:21 If thine enemi be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be
thirsty, give him water to drink: 25:22 for thou shalt heap coal of
fir upon hi head, and the lord shall reward thee.

25:23 the north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angri counten a
backbit tongue.

25:24 It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a
brawl woman and in a wide house.

25:25 As cold water to a thirsti soul, so is good news from a far
country.

25:26 A righteou man fall down befor the wick is as a troubled
fountain, and a corrupt spring.

25:27 It is not good to eat much honey: so for men to search their own
glori is not glory.

25:28 He that hath no rule over hi own spirit is like a citi that is
broken down, and without walls.

26:1 As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not
seemli for a fool.

26:2 As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse
causeless shall not come.

26:3 A whip for the horse, a bridl for the ass, and a rod for the
fool' back.

26:4 answer not a fool accord to hi folly, lest thou also be like
unto him.

26:5 answer a fool accord to hi folly, lest he be wise in hi own
conceit.

26:6 He that sendeth a messag by the hand of a fool cutteth off the
feet, and drinketh damage.

26:7 the leg of the lame are not equal: so is a parabl in the mouth
of fools.

26:8 As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth
honour to a fool.

26:9 As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable
in the mouth of fools.

26:10 the great god that form all thing both rewardeth the fool,
and rewardeth transgressors.

26:11 As a dog returneth to hi vomit, so a fool returneth to his
folly.

26:12 seest thou a man wise in hi own conceit? there is more hope of
a fool than of him.

26:13 the sloth man saith, there is a lion in the way; a lion is in
th streets.

26:14 As the door turneth upon hi hinges, so doth the sloth upon
hi bed.

26:15 the sloth hideth hi hand in hi bosom; it grieveth him to
br it again to hi mouth.

26:16 the sluggard is wiser in hi own conceit than seven men that can
rend a reason.

26:17 He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belong not to
him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.

26:18 As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death, 26:19 so
i the man that deceiveth hi neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport?
26:20 where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: so where there is no
talebearer, the strife ceaseth.

26:21 As coal are to burn coals, and wood to fire; so is a
contenti man to kindl strife.

26:22 the word of a talebear are as wounds, and they go down into
th innermost part of the belly.

26:23 burn lip and a wick heart are like a potsherd cover with
silv dross.

26:24 He that hateth dissembleth with hi lips, and layeth up deceit
within him; 26:25 when he speaketh fair, believ him not: for there
ar seven abomin in hi heart.

26:26 whose hatr is cover by deceit, hi wicked shall be
shew befor the whole congregation.

26:27 whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a
stone, it will return upon him.

26:28 A lie tongu hateth those that are afflict by it; and a
flatt mouth worketh ruin.

27:1 boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day
may bring forth.

27:2 let anoth man prais thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger,
and not thine own lips.

27:3 A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool' wrath is
heavi than them both.

27:4 wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is abl to stand
befor envy?  27:5 open rebuk is better than secret love.

27:6 faith are the wound of a friend; but the kiss of an enemy
ar deceitful.

27:7 the full soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungri soul every
bitt thing is sweet.

27:8 As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that
wandereth from hi place.

27:9 ointment and perfum rejoic the heart: so doth the sweet of
a man' friend by hearti counsel.

27:10 thine own friend, and thi father' friend, forsak not; neither
go into thi brother' hous in the day of thi calamity: for better is
a neighbour that is near than a brother far off.

27:11 My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him
that reproacheth me.

27:12 A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the
simpl pass on, and are punished.

27:13 take hi garment that is sureti for a stranger, and take a
pledg of him for a strang woman.

27:14 He that blesseth hi friend with a loud voice, rise earli in
th morning, it shall be count a curs to him.

27:15 A continu drop in a veri raini day and a contenti woman
ar alike.

27:16 whosoev hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his
right hand, which bewrayeth itself.

27:17 iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the counten of his
friend.

27:18 whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he
that waiteth on hi master shall be honoured.

27:19 As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man.

27:20 hell and destruct are never full; so the eye of man are
nev satisfied.

27:21 As the fine pot for silver, and the furnac for gold; so is a
man to hi praise.

27:22 though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a
pestle, yet will not hi foolish depart from him.

27:23 Be thou dilig to know the state of thi flocks, and look well
to thi herds.

27:24 for rich are not for ever: and doth the crown endur to every
generation?  27:25 the hay appeareth, and the tender grass sheweth
itself, and herb of the mountain are gathered.

27:26 the lamb are for thi clothing, and the goat are the price of
th field.

27:27 and thou shalt have goats' milk enough for thi food, for the
food of thi household, and for the mainten for thi maidens.

28:1 the wick flee when no man pursueth: but the righteou are bold
a a lion.

28:2 for the transgress of a land mani are the princ thereof: but
bi a man of understand and knowledg the state thereof shall be
prolonged.

28:3 A poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweep rain which
leaveth no food.

28:4 they that forsak the law prais the wicked: but such as keep the
law contend with them.

28:5 evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the lord
understand all things.

28:6 better is the poor that walketh in hi uprightness, than he that
i pervers in hi ways, though he be rich.

28:7 whoso keepeth the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion
of riotou men shameth hi father.

28:8 He that by usuri and unjust gain increaseth hi substance, he
shal gather it for him that will piti the poor.

28:9 He that turneth away hi ear from hear the law, even his
pray shall be abomination.

28:10 whoso causeth the righteou to go astray in an evil way, he
shal fall himself into hi own pit: but the upright shall have good
th in possession.

28:11 the rich man is wise in hi own conceit; but the poor that hath
understand searcheth him out.

28:12 when righteou men do rejoice, there is great glory: but when
th wick rise, a man is hidden.

28:13 He that covereth hi sin shall not prosper: but whoso
confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.

28:14 happi is the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his
heart shall fall into mischief.

28:15 As a roar lion, and a rang bear; so is a wick ruler over
th poor people.

28:16 the princ that wanteth understand is also a great oppressor:
but he that hateth covet shall prolong hi days.

28:17 A man that doeth violenc to the blood of ani person shall flee
to the pit; let no man stay him.

28:18 whoso walketh uprightli shall be saved: but he that is perverse
in hi way shall fall at once.

28:19 He that tilleth hi land shall have plenti of bread: but he that
followeth after vain person shall have poverti enough.

28:20 A faith man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh
hast to be rich shall not be innocent.

28:21 To have respect of person is not good: for for a piec of bread
that man will transgress.

28:22 He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth not
that poverti shall come upon him.

28:23 He that rebuketh a man afterward shall find more favour than he
that flattereth with the tongue.

28:24 whoso robbeth hi father or hi mother, and saith, It is no
transgression; the same is the companion of a destroyer.

28:25 He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he that
putteth hi trust in the lord shall be made fat.

28:26 He that trusteth in hi own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh
wisely, he shall be delivered.

28:27 He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: but he that hideth
hi eye shall have mani a curse.

28:28 when the wick rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish,
th righteou increase.

29:1 he, that be often reprov hardeneth hi neck, shall suddenly
b destroyed, and that without remedy.

29:2 when the righteou are in authority, the peopl rejoice: but when
th wick beareth rule, the peopl mourn.

29:3 whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth hi father: but he that keepeth
compani with harlot spendeth hi substance.

29:4 the king by judgment establisheth the land: but he that receiveth
gift overthroweth it.

29:5 A man that flattereth hi neighbour spreadeth a net for hi feet.

29:6 In the transgress of an evil man there is a snare: but the
right doth sing and rejoice.

29:7 the righteou considereth the caus of the poor: but the wicked
regardeth not to know it.

29:8 scorn men bring a citi into a snare: but wise men turn away
wrath.

29:9 If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or
laugh, there is no rest.

29:10 the bloodthirsti hate the upright: but the just seek hi soul.

29:11 A fool uttereth all hi mind: but a wise man keepeth it in till
afterwards.

29:12 If a ruler hearken to lies, all hi servant are wicked.

29:13 the poor and the deceit man meet together: the lord
lighteneth both their eyes.

29:14 the king that faith judgeth the poor, hi throne shall be
establish for ever.

29:15 the rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself
bringeth hi mother to shame.

29:16 when the wick are multiplied, transgress increaseth: but
th righteou shall see their fall.

29:17 correct thi son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give
delight unto thi soul.

29:18 where there is no vision, the peopl perish: but he that keepeth
th law, happi is he.

29:19 A servant will not be correct by words: for though he
understand he will not answer.

29:20 seest thou a man that is hasti in hi words? there is more hope
of a fool than of him.

29:21 He that delic bringeth up hi servant from a child shall
hav him becom hi son at the length.

29:22 An angri man stirreth up strife, and a furiou man aboundeth in
transgression.

29:23 A man' pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the
humbl in spirit.

29:24 whoso is partner with a thief hateth hi own soul: he heareth
cursing, and bewrayeth it not.

29:25 the fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth hi trust in
th lord shall be safe.

29:26 mani seek the ruler' favour; but everi man' judgment cometh
from the lord.

29:27 An unjust man is an abomin to the just: and he that is
upright in the way is abomin to the wicked.

30:1 the word of agur the son of jakeh, even the prophecy: the man
spak unto ithiel, even unto ithiel and ucal, 30:2 sure I am more
brutish than ani man, and have not the understand of a man.

30:3 I neither learn wisdom, nor have the knowledg of the holy.

30:4 who hath ascend up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered
th wind in hi fists? who hath bound the water in a garment? who
hath establish all the end of the earth? what is hi name, and what
i hi son' name, if thou canst tell?  30:5 everi word of god is
pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him.

30:6 add thou not unto hi words, lest he reprov thee, and thou be
found a liar.

30:7 two thing have I requir of thee; deni me them not befor i
die: 30:8 remov far from me vaniti and lies: give me neither poverty
nor riches; feed me with food conveni for me: 30:9 lest I be full,
and deni thee, and say, who is the lord? or lest I be poor, and steal,
and take the name of my god in vain.

30:10 accus not a servant unto hi master, lest he curs thee, and
thou be found guilty.

30:11 there is a gener that curseth their father, and doth not
bless their mother.

30:12 there is a gener that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
i not wash from their filthiness.

30:13 there is a generation, O how lofti are their eyes! and their
eyelid are lift up.

30:14 there is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw
teeth as knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy
from among men.

30:15 the horseleach hath two daughters, crying, give, give. there are
thre thing that are never satisfied, yea, four thing say not, It is
enough: 30:16 the grave; and the barren womb; the earth that is not
fil with water; and the fire that saith not, It is enough.

30:17 the eye that mocketh at hi father, and despiseth to obey his
mother, the raven of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
eagl shall eat it.

30:18 there be three thing which are too wonder for me, yea, four
which I know not: 30:19 the way of an eagl in the air; the way of a
serp upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and
th way of a man with a maid.

30:20 such is the way of an adulter woman; she eateth, and wipeth
h mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.

30:21 for three thing the earth is disquieted, and for four which it
cannot bear: 30:22 for a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he
i fill with meat; 30:23 for an odiou woman when she is married;
and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress.

30:24 there be four thing which are littl upon the earth, but they
ar exceed wise: 30:25 the ant are a peopl not strong, yet they
prepar their meat in the summer; 30:26 the coni are but a feeble
folk, yet make they their hous in the rocks; 30:27 the locust have
no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands; 30:28 the spider
taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings' palaces.

30:29 there be three thing which go well, yea, four are come in
going: 30:30 A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not
away for any; 30:31 A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against
whom there is no rise up.

30:32 If thou hast done foolishli in lift up thyself, or if thou
hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thi mouth.

30:33 sure the churn of milk bringeth forth butter, and the
wring of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forc of wrath
bringeth forth strife.

31:1 the word of king lemuel, the propheci that hi mother taught
him.

31:2 what, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of
mi vows?  31:3 give not thi strength unto women, nor thi way to that
which destroyeth kings.

31:4 It is not for kings, O lemuel, it is not for king to drink wine;
nor for princ strong drink: 31:5 lest they drink, and forget the
law, and pervert the judgment of ani of the afflicted.

31:6 give strong drink unto him that is readi to perish, and wine unto
thos that be of heavi hearts.

31:7 let him drink, and forget hi poverty, and rememb hi miseri no
more.

31:8 open thi mouth for the dumb in the caus of all such as are
appoint to destruction.

31:9 open thi mouth, judg righteously, and plead the caus of the
poor and needy.

31:10 who can find a virtuou woman? for her price is far above
rubies.

31:11 the heart of her husband doth safe trust in her, so that he
shal have no need of spoil.

31:12 she will do him good and not evil all the day of her life.

31:13 she seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingli with her
hands.

31:14 she is like the merchants' ships; she bringeth her food from
afar.

31:15 she riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her
household, and a portion to her maidens.

31:16 she considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her
hand she planteth a vineyard.

31:17 she girdeth her loin with strength, and strengtheneth her arms.

31:18 she perceiveth that her merchandis is good: her candl goeth
not out by night.

31:19 she layeth her hand to the spindle, and her hand hold the
distaff.

31:20 she stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth
her hand to the needy.

31:21 she is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her
household are cloth with scarlet.

31:22 she maketh herself cover of tapestry; her cloth is silk
and purple.

31:23 her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the
eld of the land.

31:24 she maketh fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles
unto the merchant.

31:25 strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoic in
tim to come.

31:26 she openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongu is the law
of kindness.

31:27 she looketh well to the way of her household, and eateth not
th bread of idleness.

31:28 her children aris up, and call her blessed; her husband also,
and he praiseth her.

31:29 mani daughter have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.

31:30 favour is deceitful, and beauti is vain: but a woman that
feareth the lord, she shall be praised.

31:31 give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own work praise
h in the gates.




ecclesiastes

or

th preacher


1:1 the word of the preacher, the son of david, king in jerusalem.

1:2 vaniti of vanities, saith the preacher, vaniti of vanities; all is
vanity.

1:3 what profit hath a man of all hi labour which he taketh under the
sun?  1:4 one gener passeth away, and anoth gener cometh:
but the earth abideth for ever.

1:5 the sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his
plac where he arose.

1:6 the wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north;
it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according
to hi circuits.

1:7 all the river run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto the
plac from whenc the river come, thither they return again.

1:8 all thing are full of labour; man cannot utter it: the eye is not
satisfi with seeing, nor the ear fill with hearing.

1:9 the thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing
und the sun.

1:10 Is there ani thing whereof it may be said, see, thi is new? it
hath been alreadi of old time, which wa befor us.

1:11 there is no remembr of former things; neither shall there be
ani remembr of thing that are to come with those that shall come
after.

1:12 I the preacher wa king over israel in jerusalem.

1:13 and I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning
al thing that are done under heaven: thi sore travail hath god
given to the son of man to be exercis therewith.

1:14 I have seen all the work that are done under the sun; and,
behold, all is vaniti and vexat of spirit.

1:15 that which is crook cannot be made straight: and that which is
want cannot be numbered.

1:16 I commun with mine own heart, saying, lo, I am come to great
estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been
befor me in jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experi of wisdom
and knowledge.

1:17 and I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know mad and
folly: I perceiv that thi also is vexat of spirit.

1:18 for in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth
knowledg increaseth sorrow.

2:1 I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
therefor enjoy pleasure: and, behold, thi also is vanity.

2:2 I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, what doeth it?  2:3 i
sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquaint mine
heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was
that good for the son of men, which they should do under the heaven
al the day of their life.

2:4 I made me great works; I build me houses; I plant me
vineyards: 2:5 I made me garden and orchards, and I plant tree in
them of all kind of fruits: 2:6 I made me pool of water, to water
therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees: 2:7 I got me servants
and maidens, and had servant born in my house; also I had great
possess of great and small cattl abov all that were in jerusalem
befor me: 2:8 I gather me also silver and gold, and the peculiar
treasur of king and of the provinces: I gat me men singer and women
singers, and the delight of the son of men, as music instruments,
and that of all sorts.

2:9 So I wa great, and increas more than all that were befor me in
jerusalem: also my wisdom remain with me.

2:10 and whatsoev mine eye desir I kept not from them, I withheld
not my heart from ani joy; for my heart rejoic in all my labour: and
thi wa my portion of all my labour.

2:11 then I look on all the work that my hand had wrought, and on
th labour that I had labour to do: and, behold, all wa vaniti and
vex of spirit, and there wa no profit under the sun.

2:12 and I turn myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for
what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath
been alreadi done.

2:13 then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth
darkness.

2:14 the wise man' eye are in hi head; but the fool walketh in
darkness: and I myself perceiv also that one event happeneth to them
all.

2:15 then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it
happeneth even to me; and whi wa I then more wise? then I said in my
heart, that thi also is vanity.

2:16 for there is no remembr of the wise more than of the fool for
ever; see that which now is in the day to come shall all be
forgotten.

and how dieth the wise man? as the fool.

2:17 therefor I hate life; becaus the work that is wrought under
th sun is grievou unto me: for all is vaniti and vexat of spirit.

2:18 yea, I hate all my labour which I had taken under the sun:
becaus I should leav it unto the man that shall be after me.

2:19 and who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet
shal he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and
wherein I have shew myself wise under the sun. thi is also vanity.

2:20 therefor I went about to caus my heart to despair of all the
labour which I took under the sun.

2:21 for there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge,
and in equity; yet to a man that hath not labour therein shall he
leav it for hi portion. thi also is vaniti and a great evil.

2:22 for what hath man of all hi labour, and of the vexat of his
heart, wherein he hath labour under the sun?  2:23 for all hi days
ar sorrows, and hi travail grief; yea, hi heart taketh not rest in
th night. thi is also vanity.

2:24 there is noth better for a man, than that he should eat and
drink, and that he should make hi soul enjoy good in hi labour. this
also I saw, that it wa from the hand of god.

2:25 for who can eat, or who els can hasten hereunto, more than i?
2:26 for god giveth to a man that is good in hi sight wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and
to heap up, that he may give to him that is good befor god. thi also
i vaniti and vexat of spirit.

3:1 To everi thing there is a season, and a time to everi purpose
und the heaven: 3:2 A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to
plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; 3:3 A time to
kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build
up; 3:4 A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
tim to dance; 3:5 A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather
ston together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
embracing; 3:6 A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and
a time to cast away; 3:7 A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to
keep silence, and a time to speak; 3:8 A time to love, and a time to
hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.

3:9 what profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
3:10 I have seen the travail, which god hath given to the son of men
to be exercis in it.

3:11 He hath made everi thing beauti in hi time: also he hath set
th world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that
god maketh from the begin to the end.

3:12 I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice,
and to do good in hi life.

3:13 and also that everi man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good
of all hi labour, it is the gift of god.

3:14 I know that, whatsoev god doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing
can be put to it, nor ani thing taken from it: and god doeth it, that
men should fear befor him.

3:15 that which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already
been; and god requireth that which is past.

3:16 and moreov I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
wicked wa there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity
wa there.

3:17 I said in mine heart, god shall judg the righteou and the
wicked: for there is a time there for everi purpos and for every
work.

3:18 I said in mine heart concern the estat of the son of men,
that god might manifest them, and that they might see that they
themselv are beasts.

3:19 for that which befalleth the son of men befalleth beasts; even
on thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea,
they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preemin abov a
beast: for all is vanity.

3:20 all go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
again.

3:21 who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit
of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?  3:22 wherefor i
perc that there is noth better, than that a man should rejoice
in hi own works; for that is hi portion: for who shall bring him to
se what shall be after him?  4:1 So I returned, and consid all
th oppress that are done under the sun: and behold the tear of
such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of
their oppressor there wa power; but they had no comforter.

4:2 wherefor I prais the dead which are alreadi dead more than the
liv which are yet alive.

4:3 yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who
hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.

4:4 again, I consid all travail, and everi right work, that for
thi a man is envi of hi neighbour. thi is also vaniti and
vex of spirit.

4:5 the fool foldeth hi hand together, and eateth hi own flesh.

4:6 better is an hand with quietness, than both the hand full with
travail and vexat of spirit.

4:7 then I returned, and I saw vaniti under the sun.

4:8 there is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath
neith child nor brother: yet is there no end of all hi labour;
neith is hi eye satisfi with riches; neither saith he, for whom
do I labour, and bereav my soul of good? thi is also vanity, yea, it
i a sore travail.

4:9 two are better than one; becaus they have a good reward for their
labour.

4:10 for if they fall, the one will lift up hi fellow: but woe to him
that is alon when he falleth; for he hath not anoth to help him up.

4:11 again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one
b warm alone?  4:12 and if one prevail against him, two shall
withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickli broken.

4:13 better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king,
who will no more be admonished.

4:14 for out of prison he cometh to reign; wherea also he that is
born in hi kingdom becometh poor.

4:15 I consid all the live which walk under the sun, with the
second child that shall stand up in hi stead.

4:16 there is no end of all the people, even of all that have been
befor them: they also that come after shall not rejoic in him.
sur thi also is vaniti and vexat of spirit.

5:1 keep thi foot when thou goest to the hous of god, and be more
readi to hear, than to give the sacrific of fools: for they consider
not that they do evil.

5:2 Be not rash with thi mouth, and let not thine heart be hasti to
utt ani thing befor god: for god is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
therefor let thi word be few.

5:3 for a dream cometh through the multitud of business; and a fool's
voic is known by multitud of words.

5:4 when thou vowest a vow unto god, defer not to pay it; for he hath
no pleasur in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.

5:5 better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest
vow and not pay.

5:6 suffer not thi mouth to caus thi flesh to sin; neither say thou
befor the angel, that it wa an error: wherefor should god be angry
at thi voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?  5:7 for in the
multitud of dream and mani word there are also diver vanities: but
fear thou god.

5:8 If thou seest the oppress of the poor, and violent perverting
of judgment and justic in a province, marvel not at the matter: for
h that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than
they.

5:9 moreov the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is
serv by the field.

5:10 He that loveth silver shall not be satisfi with silver; nor he
that loveth abund with increase: thi is also vanity.

5:11 when good increase, they are increas that eat them: and what
good is there to the owner thereof, save the behold of them with
their eyes?  5:12 the sleep of a labour man is sweet, whether he
eat littl or much: but the abund of the rich will not suffer him
to sleep.

5:13 there is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely,
rich kept for the owner thereof to their hurt.

5:14 but those rich perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son,
and there is noth in hi hand.

5:15 As he came forth of hi mother' womb, nake shall he return to
go as he came, and shall take noth of hi labour, which he may
carri away in hi hand.

5:16 and thi also is a sore evil, that in all point as he came, so
shal he go: and what profit hath he that hath labour for the wind?
5:17 all hi day also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow
and wrath with hi sickness.

5:18 behold that which I have seen: it is good and come for one to
eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all hi labour that he
taketh under the sun all the day of hi life, which god giveth him:
for it is hi portion.

5:19 everi man also to whom god hath given rich and wealth, and hath
given him power to eat thereof, and to take hi portion, and to
rejoic in hi labour; thi is the gift of god.

5:20 for he shall not much rememb the day of hi life; becaus god
answereth him in the joy of hi heart.

6:1 there is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is common
among men: 6:2 A man to whom god hath given riches, wealth, and
honour, so that he wanteth noth for hi soul of all that he
desireth, yet god giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
eateth it: thi is vanity, and it is an evil disease.

6:3 If a man beget an hundr children, and live mani years, so that
th day of hi year be many, and hi soul be not fill with good,
and also that he have no burial; I say, that an untim birth is
bett than he.

6:4 for he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his
nam shall be cover with darkness.

6:5 moreov he hath not seen the sun, nor known ani thing: thi hath
mor rest than the other.

6:6 yea, though he live a thousand year twice told, yet hath he seen
no good: do not all go to one place?  6:7 all the labour of man is for
hi mouth, and yet the appetit is not filled.

6:8 for what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor,
that knoweth to walk befor the living?  6:9 better is the sight of
th eye than the wander of the desire: thi is also vaniti and
vex of spirit.

6:10 that which hath been is name already, and it is known that it is
man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.

6:11 see there be mani thing that increas vanity, what is man the
better?  6:12 for who knoweth what is good for man in thi life, all
th day of hi vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can
tel a man what shall be after him under the sun?  7:1 A good name is
bett than preciou ointment; and the day of death than the day of
one' birth.

7:2 It is better to go to the hous of mourning, than to go to the
hous of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and the live will
lay it to hi heart.

7:3 sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sad of the
counten the heart is made better.

7:4 the heart of the wise is in the hous of mourning; but the heart
of fool is in the hous of mirth.

7:5 It is better to hear the rebuk of the wise, than for a man to
hear the song of fools.

7:6 for as the crackl of thorn under a pot, so is the laughter of
th fool: thi also is vanity.

7:7 sure oppress maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth the
heart.

7:8 better is the end of a thing than the begin thereof: and the
pati in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.

7:9 Be not hasti in thi spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the
bosom of fools.

7:10 say not thou, what is the caus that the former day were better
than these? for thou dost not enquir wise concern this.

7:11 wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to
them that see the sun.

7:12 for wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the
excel of knowledg is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have
it.

7:13 consid the work of god: for who can make that straight, which
h hath made crooked?  7:14 In the day of prosper be joyful, but in
th day of advers consider: god also hath set the one over against
th other, to the end that man should find noth after him.

7:15 all thing have I seen in the day of my vanity: there is a just
man that perisheth in hi righteousness, and there is a wick man
that prolongeth hi life in hi wickedness.

7:16 Be not righteou over much; neither make thyself over wise: why
shouldest thou destroy thyself ?  7:17 Be not over much wicked,
neith be thou foolish: whi shouldest thou die befor thi time?  7:18
it is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this
withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth god shall come forth of
them all.

7:19 wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighti men which are
in the city.

7:20 for there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
sinneth not.

7:21 also take no heed unto all word that are spoken; lest thou hear
thi servant curs thee: 7:22 for oftentim also thine own heart
knoweth that thou thyself likewis hast curs others.

7:23 all thi have I prove by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it
wa far from me.

7:24 that which is far off, and exceed deep, who can find it out?
7:25 I appli mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out
wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wicked of folly,
even of foolish and madness: 7:26 and I find more bitter than
death the woman, whose heart is snare and nets, and her hand as
bands: whoso pleaseth god shall escap from her; but the sinner shall
b taken by her.

7:27 behold, thi have I found, saith the preacher, count one by
one, to find out the account: 7:28 which yet my soul seeketh, but i
find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all
thos have I not found.

7:29 lo, thi onli have I found, that god hath made man upright; but
they have sought out mani inventions.

8:1 who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpret of a
thing?  a man' wisdom maketh hi face to shine, and the bold of
hi face shall be changed.

8:2 I counsel thee to keep the king' commandment, and that in regard
of the oath of god.

8:3 Be not hasti to go out of hi sight: stand not in an evil thing;
for he doeth whatsoev pleaseth him.

8:4 where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto
him, what doest thou?  8:5 whoso keepeth the command shall feel no
evil thing: and a wise man' heart discerneth both time and judgment.

8:6 becaus to everi purpos there is time and judgment, therefor the
miseri of man is great upon him.

8:7 for he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him when
it shall be?  8:8 there is no man that hath power over the spirit to
retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and
ther is no discharg in that war; neither shall wicked deliver
thos that are given to it.

8:9 all thi have I seen, and appli my heart unto everi work that is
don under the sun: there is a time wherein one man ruleth over
anoth to hi own hurt.

8:10 and so I saw the wick buried, who had come and gone from the
plac of the holy, and they were forgotten in the citi where they had
so done: thi is also vanity.

8:11 becaus sentenc against an evil work is not execut speedily,
therefor the heart of the son of men is fulli set in them to do
evil.

8:12 though a sinner do evil an hundr times, and hi day be
prolonged, yet sure I know that it shall be well with them that fear
god, which fear befor him: 8:13 but it shall not be well with the
wicked, neither shall he prolong hi days, which are as a shadow;
becaus he feareth not befor god.

8:14 there is a vaniti which is done upon the earth; that there be
just men, unto whom it happeneth accord to the work of the wicked;
again, there be wick men, to whom it happeneth accord to the work
of the righteous: I said that thi also is vanity.

8:15 then I commend mirth, becaus a man hath no better thing under
th sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall
abid with him of hi labour the day of hi life, which god giveth
him under the sun.

8:16 when I appli mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business
that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor
night seeth sleep with hi eyes:) 8:17 then I beheld all the work of
god, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun:
becaus though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it;
yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be
abl to find it.

9:1 for all thi I consid in my heart even to declar all this,
that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of
god: no man knoweth either love or hatr by all that is befor them.

9:2 all thing come alik to all: there is one event to the righteous,
and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean;
to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the
good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an
oath.

9:3 thi is an evil among all thing that are done under the sun, that
ther is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the son of men is
ful of evil, and mad is in their heart while they live, and after
that they go to the dead.

9:4 for to him that is join to all the live there is hope: for a
liv dog is better than a dead lion.

9:5 for the live know that they shall die: but the dead know not any
thing, neither have they ani more a reward; for the memori of them is
forgotten.

9:6 also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now
perished; neither have they ani more a portion for ever in ani thing
that is done under the sun.

9:7 Go thi way, eat thi bread with joy, and drink thi wine with a
merri heart; for god now accepteth thi works.

9:8 let thi garment be alway white; and let thi head lack no
ointment.

9:9 live joy with the wife whom thou lovest all the day of the
lif of thi vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the
day of thi vanity: for that is thi portion in thi life, and in thy
labour which thou takest under the sun.

9:10 whatsoev thi hand findeth to do, do it with thi might; for
ther is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whith thou goest.

9:11 I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battl to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet rich to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of
skill; but time and chanc happeneth to them all.

9:12 for man also knoweth not hi time: as the fish that are taken
in an evil net, and as the bird that are caught in the snare; so are
th son of men snare in an evil time, when it falleth suddenli upon
them.

9:13 thi wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seem great
unto me: 9:14 there wa a littl city, and few men within it; and
ther came a great king against it, and besieg it, and built great
bulwark against it: 9:15 now there wa found in it a poor wise man,
and he by hi wisdom deliv the city; yet no man rememb that
sam poor man.

9:16 then said I, wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the
poor man' wisdom is despised, and hi word are not heard.

9:17 the word of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cri of him
that ruleth among fools.

9:18 wisdom is better than weapon of war: but one sinner destroyeth
much good.

10:1 dead fli caus the ointment of the apothecari to send forth a
stink savour: so doth a littl folli him that is in reput for
wisdom and honour.

10:2 A wise man' heart is at hi right hand; but a fool' heart at
hi left.

10:3 yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, hi wisdom
faileth him, and he saith to everi one that he is a fool.

10:4 If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leav not thy
place; for yield pacifieth great offences.

10:5 there is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error
which proceedeth from the ruler: 10:6 folli is set in great dignity,
and the rich sit in low place.

10:7 I have seen servant upon horses, and princ walk as servants
upon the earth.

10:8 He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh an
hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

10:9 whoso removeth stone shall be hurt therewith; and he that
cleaveth wood shall be endang thereby.

10:10 If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he
put to more strength: but wisdom is profit to direct.

10:11 sure the serpent will bite without enchantment; and a babbler
i no better.

10:12 the word of a wise man' mouth are gracious; but the lip of a
fool will swallow up himself.

10:13 the begin of the word of hi mouth is foolishness: and the
end of hi talk is mischiev madness.

10:14 A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be;
and what shall be after him, who can tell him?  10:15 the labour of
th foolish wearieth everi one of them, becaus he knoweth not how to
go to the city.

10:16 woe to thee, O land, when thi king is a child, and thi princes
eat in the morning!  10:17 bless art thou, O land, when thi king is
th son of nobles, and thi princ eat in due season, for strength,
and not for drunkenness!  10:18 By much sloth the building
decayeth; and through idl of the hand the hous droppeth
through.

10:19 A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but money
answereth all things.

10:20 curs not the king, no not in thi thought; and curs not the
rich in thi bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carri the voice,
and that which hath wing shall tell the matter.

11:1 cast thi bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many
days.

11:2 give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not
what evil shall be upon the earth.

11:3 If the cloud be full of rain, they empti themselv upon the
earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in
th place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.

11:4 He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth
th cloud shall not reap.

11:5 As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
bon do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou
knowest not the work of god who maketh all.

11:6 In the morn sow thi seed, and in the even withhold not
thin hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either thi or
that, or whether they both shall be alik good.

11:7 truli the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes
to behold the sun: 11:8 but if a man live mani years, and rejoic in
them all; yet let him rememb the day of darkness; for they shall be
many. all that cometh is vanity.

11:9 rejoice, O young man, in thi youth; and let thi heart cheer thee
in the day of thi youth, and walk in the way of thine heart, and in
th sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these thing god
wil bring thee into judgment.

11:10 therefor remov sorrow from thi heart, and put away evil from
thi flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.

12:1 rememb now thi creator in the day of thi youth, while the evil
day come not, nor the year draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no
pleasur in them; 12:2 while the sun, or the light, or the moon, or
th stars, be not darkened, nor the cloud return after the rain: 12:3
in the day when the keeper of the hous shall tremble, and the strong
men shall bow themselves, and the grinder ceas becaus they are few,
and those that look out of the window be darkened, 12:4 and the doors
shal be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grind is low,
and he shall rise up at the voic of the bird, and all the daughters
of musick shall be brought low; 12:5 also when they shall be afraid of
that which is high, and fear shall be in the way, and the almond tree
shal flourish, and the grasshopp shall be a burden, and desire
shal fail: becaus man goeth to hi long home, and the mourner go
about the streets: 12:6 Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the
golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or
th wheel broken at the cistern.

12:7 then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit
shal return unto god who gave it.

12:8 vaniti of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity.

12:9 and moreover, becaus the preacher wa wise, he still taught the
peopl knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
ord mani proverbs.

12:10 the preacher sought to find out accept words: and that which
wa written wa upright, even word of truth.

12:11 the word of the wise are as goads, and as nail fasten by the
mast of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

12:12 and further, by these, my son, be admonished: of make many
book there is no end; and much studi is a weari of the flesh.

12:13 let us hear the conclus of the whole matter: fear god, and
keep hi commandments: for thi is the whole duti of man.

12:14 for god shall bring everi work into judgment, with everi secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.




th song of solomon


1:1 the song of songs, which is solomon's.

1:2 let him kiss me with the kiss of hi mouth: for thi love is
bett than wine.

1:3 becaus of the savour of thi good ointment thi name is as
oint pour forth, therefor do the virgin love thee.

1:4 draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his
chambers: we will be glad and rejoic in thee, we will rememb thy
lov more than wine: the upright love thee.

1:5 I am black, but comely, O ye daughter of jerusalem, as the tents
of kedar, as the curtain of solomon.

1:6 look not upon me, becaus I am black, becaus the sun hath looked
upon me: my mother' children were angri with me; they made me the
keep of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not kept.

1:7 tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where
th makest thi flock to rest at noon: for whi should I be as one that
turneth asid by the flock of thi companions?  1:8 If thou know not,
o thou fairest among women, go thi way forth by the footstep of the
flock, and feed thi kid besid the shepherds' tents.

1:9 I have compar thee, O my love, to a compani of hors in
pharaoh' chariots.

1:10 thi cheek are come with row of jewels, thi neck with chains
of gold.

1:11 We will make thee border of gold with stud of silver.

1:12 while the king sitteth at hi table, my spikenard sendeth forth
th smell thereof.

1:13 A bundl of myrrh is my well-belov unto me; he shall lie all
night betwixt my breasts.

1:14 My belov is unto me as a cluster of camphir in the vineyards
of engedi.

1:15 behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eyes.

1:16 behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is
green.

1:17 the beam of our hous are cedar, and our rafter of fir.

2:1 I am the rose of sharon, and the lili of the valleys.

2:2 As the lili among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

2:3 As the appl tree among the tree of the wood, so is my beloved
among the sons. I sat down under hi shadow with great delight, and
hi fruit wa sweet to my taste.

2:4 He brought me to the banquet house, and hi banner over me was
love.

2:5 stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples: for I am sick of
love.

2:6 hi left hand is under my head, and hi right hand doth embrace
me.

2:7 I charg you, O ye daughter of jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
hind of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awak my love, till he
please.

2:8 the voic of my beloved! behold, he cometh leap upon the
mountains, skip upon the hills.

2:9 My belov is like a roe or a young hart: behold, he standeth
behind our wall, he looketh forth at the windows, shew himself
through the lattice.

2:10 My belov spake, and said unto me, rise up, my love, my fair
one, and come away.

2:11 for, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; 2:12 the
flow appear on the earth; the time of the sing of bird is come,
and the voic of the turtl is heard in our land; 2:13 the fig tree
putteth forth her green figs, and the vine with the tender grape give
a good smell. arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.

2:14 O my dove, that art in the cleft of the rock, in the secret
plac of the stairs, let me see thi countenance, let me hear thy
voice; for sweet is thi voice, and thi counten is comely.

2:15 take us the foxes, the littl foxes, that spoil the vines: for
our vine have tender grapes.

2:16 My belov is mine, and I am his: he feedeth among the lilies.

2:17 until the day break, and the shadow flee away, turn, my beloved,
and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountain of bether.

3:1 By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him,
but I found him not.

3:2 I will rise now, and go about the citi in the streets, and in the
broad way I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but i
found him not.

3:3 the watchmen that go about the citi found me: to whom I said, saw
y him whom my soul loveth?  3:4 It wa but a littl that I passed
from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would
not let him go, until I had brought him into my mother' house, and
into the chamber of her that conceiv me.

3:5 I charg you, O ye daughter of jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
hind of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awak my love, till he
please.

3:6 who is thi that cometh out of the wilder like pillar of
smoke, perfum with myrrh and frankincense, with all powder of the
merchant?  3:7 behold hi bed, which is solomon's; threescor valiant
men are about it, of the valiant of israel.

3:8 they all hold swords, be expert in war: everi man hath his
sword upon hi thigh becaus of fear in the night.

3:9 king solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of lebanon.

3:10 He made the pillar thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of
gold, the cover of it of purple, the midst thereof be pave with
love, for the daughter of jerusalem.

3:11 Go forth, O ye daughter of zion, and behold king solomon with
th crown wherewith hi mother crown him in the day of his
espousals, and in the day of the glad of hi heart.

4:1 behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eye within thi locks: thi hair is as a flock of goats, that
appear from mount gilead.

4:2 thi teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which
cam up from the washing; whereof everi one bear twins, and none is
barren among them.

4:3 thi lip are like a thread of scarlet, and thi speech is comely:
thi templ are like a piec of a pomegran within thi locks.

4:4 thi neck is like the tower of david build for an armoury,
whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shield of mighti men.

4:5 thi two breast are like two young roe that are twins, which feed
among the lilies.

4:6 until the day break, and the shadow flee away, I will get me to
th mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

4:7 thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee.

4:8 come with me from lebanon, my spouse, with me from lebanon: look
from the top of amana, from the top of shenir and hermon, from the
lions' dens, from the mountain of the leopards.

4:9 thou hast ravish my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast
ravish my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thi neck.

4:10 how fair is thi love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is
thi love than wine! and the smell of thine ointment than all spices!
4:11 thi lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are
und thi tongue; and the smell of thi garment is like the smell of
lebanon.

4:12 A garden inclos is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed.

4:13 thi plant are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits;
camphire, with spikenard, 4:14 spikenard and saffron; calamu and
cinnamon, with all tree of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all
th chief spices: 4:15 A fountain of gardens, a well of live waters,
and stream from lebanon.

4:16 awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden,
that the spice thereof may flow out. let my belov come into his
garden, and eat hi pleasant fruits.

5:1 I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gather my
myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have
drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink
abundantly, O beloved.

5:2 I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voic of my belov that
knocketh, saying, open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled: for my head is fill with dew, and my lock with the drops
of the night.

5:3 I have put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have wash my
feet; how shall I defil them?  5:4 My belov put in hi hand by the
hol of the door, and my bowel were move for him.

5:5 I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hand drop with myrrh,
and my finger with sweet smell myrrh, upon the handl of the
lock.

5:6 I open to my beloved; but my belov had withdrawn himself, and
wa gone: my soul fail when he spake: I sought him, but I could not
find him; I call him, but he gave me no answer.

5:7 the watchmen that went about the citi found me, they smote me,
they wound me; the keeper of the wall took away my veil from me.

5:8 I charg you, O daughter of jerusalem, if ye find my beloved,
that ye tell him, that I am sick of love.

5:9 what is thi belov more than anoth beloved, O thou fairest
among women? what is thi belov more than anoth beloved, that thou
dost so charg us?  5:10 My belov is white and ruddy, the chiefest
among ten thousand.

5:11 hi head is as the most fine gold, hi lock are bushy, and black
a a raven.

5:12 hi eye are as the eye of dove by the river of waters, washed
with milk, and fitli set.

5:13 hi cheek are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: hi lips
lik lilies, drop sweet smell myrrh.

5:14 hi hand are as gold ring set with the beryl: hi belli is as
bright ivori overlaid with sapphires.

5:15 hi leg are as pillar of marble, set upon socket of fine gold:
hi counten is as lebanon, excel as the cedars.

5:16 hi mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogeth lovely. thi is my
beloved, and thi is my friend, O daughter of jerusalem.

6:1 whither is thi belov gone, O thou fairest among women? whither
i thi belov turn aside? that we may seek him with thee.

6:2 My belov is gone down into hi garden, to the bed of spices, to
fe in the gardens, and to gather lilies.

6:3 I am my beloved's, and my belov is mine: he feedeth among the
lilies.

6:4 thou art beautiful, O my love, as tirzah, come as jerusalem,
terr as an armi with banners.

6:5 turn away thine eye from me, for they have overcom me: thi hair
i as a flock of goat that appear from gilead.

6:6 thi teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing,
whereof everi one beareth twins, and there is not one barren among
them.

6:7 As a piec of a pomegran are thi templ within thi locks.

6:8 there are threescor queens, and fourscor concubines, and virgins
without number.

6:9 My dove, my undefil is but one; she is the onli one of her
mother, she is the choic one of her that bare her. the daughter saw
her, and bless her; yea, the queen and the concubines, and they
prais her.

6:10 who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
clear as the sun, and terribl as an armi with banners?  6:11 I went
down into the garden of nut to see the fruit of the valley, and to
se whether the vine flourish and the pomegran budded.

6:12 Or ever I wa aware, my soul made me like the chariot of
amminadib.

6:13 return, return, O shulamite; return, return, that we may look
upon thee. what will ye see in the shulamite? As it were the company
of two armies.

7:1 how beauti are thi feet with shoes, O prince' daughter! the
joint of thi thigh are like jewels, the work of the hand of a
cun workman.

7:2 thi navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy
belli is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies.

7:3 thi two breast are like two young roe that are twins.

7:4 thi neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eye like the fishpool in
heshbon, by the gate of bathrabbim: thi nose is as the tower of
lebanon which looketh toward damascus.

7:5 thine head upon thee is like carmel, and the hair of thine head
lik purple; the king is held in the galleries.

7:6 how fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!  7:7
thi thi statur is like to a palm tree, and thi breast to clusters
of grapes.

7:8 I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the
bough thereof: now also thi breast shall be as cluster of the vine,
and the smell of thi nose like apples; 7:9 and the roof of thi mouth
lik the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing
th lip of those that are asleep to speak.

7:10 I am my beloved's, and hi desir is toward me.

7:11 come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodg in
th villages.

7:12 let us get up earli to the vineyards; let us see if the vine
flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegran bud
forth: there will I give thee my loves.

7:13 the mandrak give a smell, and at our gate are all manner of
pleas fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my
beloved.

8:1 O that thou wert as my brother, that suck the breast of my
mother!  when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee; yea, i
should not be despised.

8:2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother' house, who
would instruct me: I would caus thee to drink of spice wine of the
juic of my pomegranate.

8:3 hi left hand should be under my head, and hi right hand should
embrac me.

8:4 I charg you, O daughter of jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
awak my love, until he please.

8:5 who is thi that cometh up from the wilderness, lean upon her
beloved? I rais thee up under the appl tree: there thi mother
brought thee forth: there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

8:6 set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for
lov is strong as death; jealousi is cruel as the grave: the coals
thereof are coal of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.

8:7 mani water cannot quench love, neither can the flood drown it:
if a man would give all the substanc of hi hous for love, it would
utterli be contemned.

8:8 We have a littl sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do
for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?  8:9 If she be
a wall, we will build upon her a palac of silver: and if she be a
door, we will inclos her with board of cedar.

8:10 I am a wall, and my breast like towers: then wa I in hi eyes
a one that found favour.

8:11 solomon had a vineyard at baalhamon; he let out the vineyard unto
keepers; everi one for the fruit thereof wa to bring a thousand
piec of silver.

8:12 My vineyard, which is mine, is befor me: thou, O solomon, must
hav a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred.

8:13 thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companion hearken to thy
voice: caus me to hear it.

8:14 make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young
hart upon the mountain of spices.




th book of the prophet isaiah


1:1 the vision of isaiah the son of amoz, which he saw concerning
judah and jerusalem in the day of uzziah, jotham, ahaz, and hezekiah,
k of judah.

1:2 hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the lord hath spoken,
i have nourish and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me.

1:3 the ox knoweth hi owner, and the ass hi master' crib: but
israel doth not know, my peopl doth not consider.

1:4 Ah sin nation, a peopl laden with iniquity, a seed of
evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the lord,
they have provok the holi one of israel unto anger, they are gone
away backward.

1:5 whi should ye be stricken ani more? ye will revolt more and more:
th whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

1:6 from the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness
in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifi sores: they have not
been closed, neither bound up, neither mollifi with ointment.

1:7 your countri is desolate, your citi are burn with fire: your
land, stranger devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as
overthrown by strangers.

1:8 and the daughter of zion is left as a cottag in a vineyard, as a
lodg in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieg city.

1:9 except the lord of host had left unto us a veri small remnant, we
should have been as sodom, and we should have been like unto gomorrah.

1:10 hear the word of the lord, ye ruler of sodom; give ear unto the
law of our god, ye peopl of gomorrah.

1:11 To what purpos is the multitud of your sacrific unto me?
saith the lord: I am full of the burnt offer of rams, and the fat
of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of
lambs, or of he goats.

1:12 when ye come to appear befor me, who hath requir thi at your
hand, to tread my courts?  1:13 bring no more vain oblations; incense
i an abomin unto me; the new moon and sabbaths, the call of
assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting.

1:14 your new moon and your appoint feast my soul hateth: they are
a troubl unto me; I am weari to bear them.

1:15 and when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eye from
you: yea, when ye make mani prayers, I will not hear: your hand are
ful of blood.

1:16 wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your do from
befor mine eyes; ceas to do evil; 1:17 learn to do well; seek
judgment, reliev the oppressed, judg the fatherless, plead for the
widow.

1:18 come now, and let us reason together, saith the lord: though your
sin be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
lik crimson, they shall be as wool.

1:19 If ye be will and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:
1:20 but if ye refus and rebel, ye shall be devour with the sword:
for the mouth of the lord hath spoken it.

1:21 how is the faith citi becom an harlot! it wa full of
judgment; righteous lodg in it; but now murderers.

1:22 thi silver is becom dross, thi wine mix with water: 1:23 thy
princ are rebellious, and companion of thieves: everi one loveth
gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judg not the fatherless,
neith doth the caus of the widow come unto them.

1:24 therefor saith the lord, the lord of hosts, the mighti one of
israel, ah, I will eas me of mine adversaries, and aveng me of mine
enemies: 1:25 and I will turn my hand upon thee, and pure purg away
thi dross, and take away all thi tin: 1:26 and I will restor thy
judg as at the first, and thi counsellor as at the beginning:
afterward thou shalt be called, the citi of righteousness, the
faith city.

1:27 zion shall be redeem with judgment, and her convert with
righteousness.

1:28 and the destruct of the transgressor and of the sinner shall
b together, and they that forsak the lord shall be consumed.

1:29 for they shall be asham of the oak which ye have desired, and
y shall be confound for the garden that ye have chosen.

1:30 for ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that
hath no water.

1:31 and the strong shall be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark,
and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.

2:1 the word that isaiah the son of amoz saw concern judah and
jerusalem.

2:2 and it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
th lord' hous shall be establish in the top of the mountains, and
shal be exalt abov the hills; and all nation shall flow unto it.

2:3 and mani peopl shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the lord, to the hous of the god of jacob; and he will
teach us of hi ways, and we will walk in hi paths: for out of zion
shal go forth the law, and the word of the lord from jerusalem.

2:4 and he shall judg among the nations, and shall rebuk many
people: and they shall beat their sword into plowshares, and their
spear into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war ani more.

2:5 O hous of jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the
lord.

2:6 therefor thou hast forsaken thi peopl the hous of jacob,
becaus they be replenish from the east, and are soothsay like
th philistines, and they pleas themselv in the children of
strangers.

2:7 their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any
end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is
ther ani end of their chariots: 2:8 their land also is full of idols;
they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers
hav made: 2:9 and the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbleth himself: therefor forgiv them not.

2:10 enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the
lord, and for the glori of hi majesty.

2:11 the lofti look of man shall be humbled, and the haughti of
men shall be bow down, and the lord alon shall be exalt in that
day.

2:12 for the day of the lord of host shall be upon everi one that is
proud and lofty, and upon everi one that is lift up; and he shall be
brought low: 2:13 and upon all the cedar of lebanon, that are high
and lift up, and upon all the oak of bashan, 2:14 and upon all the
high mountains, and upon all the hill that are lift up, 2:15 and
upon everi high tower, and upon everi fenc wall, 2:16 and upon all
th ship of tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.

2:17 and the lofti of man shall be bow down, and the haughtiness
of men shall be made low: and the lord alon shall be exalt in that
day.

2:18 and the idol he shall utterli abolish.

2:19 and they shall go into the hole of the rocks, and into the caves
of the earth, for fear of the lord, and for the glori of hi majesty,
when he ariseth to shake terribl the earth.

2:20 In that day a man shall cast hi idol of silver, and hi idols
of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles
and to the bats; 2:21 To go into the cleft of the rocks, and into the
top of the rag rocks, for fear of the lord, and for the glori of
hi majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribl the earth.

2:22 ceas ye from man, whose breath is in hi nostrils: for wherein
i he to be account of ?  3:1 for, behold, the lord, the lord of
hosts, doth take away from jerusalem and from judah the stay and the
staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water.

3:2 the mighti man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet,
and the prudent, and the ancient, 3:3 the captain of fifty, and the
honour man, and the counsellor, and the cun artificer, and the
eloqu orator.

3:4 and I will give children to be their princes, and babe shall rule
ov them.

3:5 and the peopl shall be oppressed, everi one by another, and every
on by hi neighbour: the child shall behav himself proudli against
th ancient, and the base against the honourable.

3:6 when a man shall take hold of hi brother of the hous of his
father, saying, thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this
ruin be under thi hand: 3:7 In that day shall he swear, saying, I will
not be an healer; for in my hous is neither bread nor clothing: make
m not a ruler of the people.

3:8 for jerusalem is ruined, and judah is fallen: becaus their tongue
and their do are against the lord, to provok the eye of his
glory.

3:9 the shew of their counten doth wit against them; and they
declar their sin as sodom, they hide it not. woe unto their soul! for
they have reward evil unto themselves.

3:10 say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they
shal eat the fruit of their doings.

3:11 woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of
hi hand shall be given him.

3:12 As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule
ov them. O my people, they which lead thee caus thee to err, and
destroy the way of thi paths.

3:13 the lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judg the people.

3:14 the lord will enter into judgment with the ancient of his
people, and the princ thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard;
th spoil of the poor is in your houses.

3:15 what mean ye that ye beat my peopl to pieces, and grind the
fac of the poor? saith the lord god of hosts.

3:16 moreov the lord saith, becaus the daughter of zion are
haughty, and walk with stretch forth neck and wanton eyes, walking
and minc as they go, and make a tinkl with their feet: 3:17
therefor the lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the
daught of zion, and the lord will discov their secret parts.

3:18 In that day the lord will take away the braveri of their tinkling
orna about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires
lik the moon, 3:19 the chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
3:20 the bonnets, and the ornament of the legs, and the headbands,
and the tablets, and the earrings, 3:21 the rings, and nose jewels,
3:22 the changeabl suit of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisp pins, 3:23 the glasses, and the fine linen,
and the hoods, and the vails.

3:24 and it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there
shal be stink; and instead of a girdl a rent; and instead of well
set hair baldness; and instead of a stomach a gird of sackcloth;
and burn instead of beauty.

3:25 thi men shall fall by the sword, and thi mighti in the war.

3:26 and her gate shall lament and mourn; and she be desolate
shal sit upon the ground.

4:1 and in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, we
wil eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: onli let us be
cal by thi name, to take away our reproach.

4:2 In that day shall the branch of the lord be beauti and
glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excel and come for
them that are escap of israel.

4:3 and it shall come to pass, that he that is left in zion, and he
that remaineth in jerusalem, shall be call holy, even everi one that
i written among the live in jerusalem: 4:4 when the lord shall have
wash away the filth of the daughter of zion, and shall have purged
th blood of jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of
judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

4:5 and the lord will creat upon everi dwell place of mount zion,
and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shine of
a flame fire by night: for upon all the glori shall be a defence.

4:6 and there shall be a tabernacl for a shadow in the day time from
th heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and
from rain.

5:1 now will I sing to my wellbelov a song of my belov touching
hi vineyard. My wellbelov hath a vineyard in a veri fruit hill:
5:2 and he fenc it, and gather out the stone thereof, and planted
it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and
also made a winepress therein: and he look that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

5:3 and now, O inhabit of jerusalem, and men of judah, judge, i
pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

5:4 what could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not
don in it? wherefore, when I look that it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?  5:5 and now go to; I will tell
you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedg thereof,
and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it
shal be trodden down: 5:6 and I will lay it waste: it shall not be
pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up brier and thorns: I will
also command the cloud that they rain no rain upon it.

5:7 for the vineyard of the lord of host is the hous of israel, and
th men of judah hi pleasant plant: and he look for judgment, but
behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.

5:8 woe unto them that join hous to house, that lay field to field,
til there be no place, that they may be place alon in the midst of
th earth!  5:9 In mine ear said the lord of hosts, Of a truth many
hous shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.

5:10 yea, ten acr of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of
an homer shall yield an ephah.

5:11 woe unto them that rise up earli in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink; that continu until night, till wine inflame
them!  5:12 and the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and
wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the lord,
neith consid the oper of hi hands.

5:13 therefor my peopl are gone into captivity, becaus they have no
knowledge: and their honour men are famished, and their multitude
dri up with thirst.

5:14 therefor hell hath enlarg herself, and open her mouth
without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp,
and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

5:15 and the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighti man shall
b humbled, and the eye of the lofti shall be humbled: 5:16 but the
lord of host shall be exalt in judgment, and god that is holi shall
b sanctifi in righteousness.

5:17 then shall the lamb feed after their manner, and the waste
plac of the fat one shall stranger eat.

5:18 woe unto them that draw iniqu with cord of vanity, and sin as
it were with a cart rope: 5:19 that say, let him make speed, and
hasten hi work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the holy
on of israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!  5:20 woe unto
them that call evil good, and good evil; that put dark for light,
and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter!  5:21 woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prud in their own sight!  5:22 woe unto them that are mighti to
drink wine, and men of strength to mingl strong drink: 5:23 which
justifi the wick for reward, and take away the righteous of the
right from him!  5:24 therefor as the fire devoureth the stubble,
and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: becaus they have
cast away the law of the lord of hosts, and despis the word of the
holi one of israel.

5:25 therefor is the anger of the lord kindl against hi people,
and he hath stretch forth hi hand against them, and hath smitten
them: and the hill did tremble, and their carcas were torn in the
midst of the streets.

for all thi hi anger is not turn away, but hi hand is stretched
out still.

5:26 and he will lift up an ensign to the nation from far, and will
hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come
with speed swiftly: 5:27 none shall be weari nor stumbl among them;
non shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdl of their loins
b loosed, nor the latchet of their shoe be broken: 5:28 whose arrows
ar sharp, and all their bow bent, their horses' hoof shall be
count like flint, and their wheel like a whirlwind: 5:29 their
roar shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea,
they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carri it away
safe, and none shall deliv it.

5:30 and in that day they shall roar against them like the roar of
th sea: and if one look unto the land, behold dark and sorrow,
and the light is darken in the heaven thereof.

6:1 In the year that king uzziah die I saw also the lord sit upon
a throne, high and lift up, and hi train fill the temple.

6:2 abov it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain
h cover hi face, and with twain he cover hi feet, and with
twain he did fly.

6:3 and one cri unto another, and said, holy, holy, holy, is the
lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of hi glory.

6:4 and the post of the door move at the voic of him that cried,
and the hous wa fill with smoke.

6:5 then said I, woe is me! for I am undone; becaus I am a man of
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a peopl of unclean lips:
for mine eye have seen the king, the lord of hosts.

6:6 then flew one of the seraphim unto me, have a live coal in his
hand, which he had taken with the tong from off the altar: 6:7 and he
laid it upon my mouth, and said, lo, thi hath touch thi lips; and
thin iniqu is taken away, and thi sin purged.

6:8 also I heard the voic of the lord, saying, whom shall I send, and
who will go for us? then said I, here am I; send me.

6:9 and he said, go, and tell thi people, hear ye indeed, but
understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceiv not.

6:10 make the heart of thi peopl fat, and make their ear heavy, and
shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

6:11 then said I, lord, how long? and he answered, until the citi be
wast without inhabitant, and the hous without man, and the land be
utterli desolate, 6:12 and the lord have remov men far away, and
ther be a great forsak in the midst of the land.

6:13 but yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be
eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substanc is in them, when
they cast their leaves: so the holi seed shall be the substance
thereof.

7:1 and it came to pass in the day of ahaz the son of jotham, the son
of uzziah, king of judah, that rezin the king of syria, and pekah the
son of remaliah, king of israel, went up toward jerusalem to war
against it, but could not prevail against it.

7:2 and it wa told the hous of david, saying, syria is confederate
with ephraim. and hi heart wa moved, and the heart of hi people, as
th tree of the wood are move with the wind.

7:3 then said the lord unto isaiah, Go forth now to meet ahaz, thou,
and shearjashub thi son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool
in the highway of the fuller' field; 7:4 and say unto him, take heed,
and be quiet; fear not, neither be faintheart for the two tail of
thes smoke firebrands, for the fierc anger of rezin with syria,
and of the son of remaliah.

7:5 becaus syria, ephraim, and the son of remaliah, have taken evil
counsel against thee, saying, 7:6 let us go up against judah, and vex
it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the
midst of it, even the son of tabeal: 7:7 thu saith the lord god, it
shal not stand, neither shall it come to pass.

7:8 for the head of syria is damascus, and the head of damascu is
rezin; and within threescor and five year shall ephraim be broken,
that it be not a people.

7:9 and the head of ephraim is samaria, and the head of samaria is
remaliah' son. If ye will not believe, sure ye shall not be
established.

7:10 moreov the lord spake again unto ahaz, saying, 7:11 ask thee a
sign of the lord thi god; ask it either in the depth, or in the height
above.

7:12 but ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the lord.

7:13 and he said, hear ye now, O hous of david; Is it a small thing
for you to weari men, but will ye weari my god also?  7:14 therefore
th lord himself shall give you a sign; behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call hi name immanuel.

7:15 butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refus the
evil, and choos the good.

7:16 for befor the child shall know to refus the evil, and choose
th good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
kings.

7:17 the lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thi people, and upon thy
father' house, day that have not come, from the day that ephraim
depart from judah; even the king of assyria.

7:18 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the lord shall hiss
for the fli that is in the uttermost part of the river of egypt, and
for the bee that is in the land of assyria.

7:19 and they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate
valleys, and in the hole of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon
al bushes.

7:20 In the same day shall the lord shave with a razor that is hired,
namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of assyria, the head,
and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consum the beard.

7:21 and it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a
young cow, and two sheep; 7:22 and it shall come to pass, for the
abund of milk that they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter
and honey shall everi one eat that is left in the land.

7:23 and it shall come to pass in that day, that everi place shall be,
wher there were a thousand vine at a thousand silverlings, it shall
even be for brier and thorns.

7:24 with arrow and with bow shall men come thither; becaus all the
land shall becom brier and thorns.

7:25 and on all hill that shall be dig with the mattock, there
shal not come thither the fear of brier and thorns: but it shall be
for the send forth of oxen, and for the tread of lesser cattle.

8:1 moreov the lord said unto me, take thee a great roll, and write
in it with a man' pen concern mahershalalhashbaz.

8:2 and I took unto me faith wit to record, uriah the priest,
and zechariah the son of jeberechiah.

8:3 and I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son.

then said the lord to me, call hi name mahershalalhashbaz.

8:4 for befor the child shall have knowledg to cry, My father, and
mi mother, the rich of damascu and the spoil of samaria shall be
taken away befor the king of assyria.

8:5 the lord spake also unto me again, saying, 8:6 forasmuch as this
peopl refuseth the water of shiloah that go softly, and rejoic in
rezin and remaliah' son; 8:7 now therefore, behold, the lord bringeth
up upon them the water of the river, strong and many, even the king
of assyria, and all hi glory: and he shall come up over all his
channels, and go over all hi banks: 8:8 and he shall pass through
judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck;
and the stretch out of hi wing shall fill the breadth of thy
land, O immanuel.

8:9 associ yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye
shal be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces.

8:10 take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the
word, and it shall not stand: for god is with us.

8:11 for the lord spake thu to me with a strong hand, and instructed
m that I should not walk in the way of thi people, saying, 8:12 say
y not, A confederacy, to all them to whom thi peopl shall say, a
confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

8:13 sanctifi the lord of host himself; and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread.

8:14 and he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbl and
for a rock of offenc to both the hous of israel, for a gin and for
a snare to the inhabit of jerusalem.

8:15 and mani among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and
b snared, and be taken.

8:16 bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

8:17 and I will wait upon the lord, that hideth hi face from the
hous of jacob, and I will look for him.

8:18 behold, I and the children whom the lord hath given me are for
sign and for wonder in israel from the lord of hosts, which dwelleth
in mount zion.

8:19 and when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizard that peep, and that mutter: should
not a peopl seek unto their god? for the live to the dead?  8:20 to
th law and to the testimony: if they speak not accord to this
word, it is becaus there is no light in them.

8:21 and they shall pass through it, hardli bestead and hungry: and it
shal come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curs their king and their god, and look upward.

8:22 and they shall look unto the earth; and behold troubl and
darkness, dim of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness.

9:1 nevertheless the dim shall not be such as wa in her vexation,
when at the first he lightli afflict the land of zebulun and the
land of naphtali, and afterward did more grievous afflict her by the
way of the sea, beyond jordan, in galile of the nations.

9:2 the peopl that walk in dark have seen a great light: they
that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the
light shined.

9:3 thou hast multipli the nation, and not increas the joy: they
joy befor thee accord to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice
when they divid the spoil.

9:4 for thou hast broken the yoke of hi burden, and the staff of his
shoulder, the rod of hi oppressor, as in the day of midian.

9:5 for everi battl of the warrior is with confus noise, and
gar roll in blood; but thi shall be with burn and fuel of
fire.

9:6 for unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the
govern shall be upon hi shoulder: and hi name shall be called
wonderful, counsellor, the mighti god, the everlast father, the
princ of peace.

9:7 Of the increas of hi govern and peac there shall be no end,
upon the throne of david, and upon hi kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justic from henceforth even for
ever. the zeal of the lord of host will perform this.

9:8 the lord sent a word into jacob, and it hath light upon israel.

9:9 and all the peopl shall know, even ephraim and the inhabit of
samaria, that say in the pride and stout of heart, 9:10 the bricks
ar fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomor are
cut down, but we will chang them into cedars.

9:11 therefor the lord shall set up the adversari of rezin against
him, and join hi enemi together; 9:12 the syrian before, and the
philistin behind; and they shall devour israel with open mouth. for
al thi hi anger is not turn away, but hi hand is stretch out
still.

9:13 for the peopl turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do
they seek the lord of hosts.

9:14 therefor the lord will cut off from israel head and tail, branch
and rush, in one day.

9:15 the ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that
teacheth lies, he is the tail.

9:16 for the leader of thi peopl caus them to err; and they that
ar led of them are destroyed.

9:17 therefor the lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither
shal have merci on their fatherless and widows: for everi one is an
hypocrit and an evildoer, and everi mouth speaketh folly. for all
thi hi anger is not turn away, but hi hand is stretch out
still.

9:18 for wicked burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers
and thorns, and shall kindl in the thicket of the forest, and they
shal mount up like the lift up of smoke.

9:19 through the wrath of the lord of host is the land darkened, and
th peopl shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his
brother.

9:20 and he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he
shal eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they
shal eat everi man the flesh of hi own arm: 9:21 manasseh, ephraim;
and ephraim, manasseh: and they togeth shall be against judah. for
al thi hi anger is not turn away, but hi hand is stretch out
still.

10:1 woe unto them that decre unright decrees, and that write
griev which they have prescribed; 10:2 To turn asid the needy
from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people,
that widow may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless!
10:3 and what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desol which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help?
and where will ye leav your glory?  10:4 without me they shall bow
down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. for all
thi hi anger is not turn away, but hi hand is stretch out
still.

10:5 O assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is
min indignation.

10:6 I will send him against an hypocrit nation, and against the
peopl of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to
tak the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.

10:7 howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth hi heart think so; but
it is in hi heart to destroy and cut off nation not a few.

10:8 for he saith, are not my princ altogeth kings?  10:9 Is not
calno as carchemish? is not hamath as arpad? is not samaria as
damascus?  10:10 As my hand hath found the kingdom of the idols, and
whos graven imag did excel them of jerusalem and of samaria; 10:11
shall I not, as I have done unto samaria and her idols, so do to
jerusalem and her idols?  10:12 wherefor it shall come to pass, that
when the lord hath perform hi whole work upon mount zion and on
jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of
assyria, and the glori of hi high looks.

10:13 for he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by
mi wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have remov the bound of the
people, and have rob their treasures, and I have put down the
inhabit like a valiant man: 10:14 and my hand hath found as a nest
th rich of the people: and as one gathereth egg that are left,
hav I gather all the earth; and there wa none that move the wing,
or open the mouth, or peeped.

10:15 shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or
shal the saw magnifi itself against him that shaketh it? as if the
rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the
staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood.

10:16 therefor shall the lord, the lord of hosts, send among hi fat
on leanness; and under hi glori he shall kindl a burn like the
burn of a fire.

10:17 and the light of israel shall be for a fire, and hi holi one
for a flame: and it shall burn and devour hi thorn and hi brier in
on day; 10:18 and shall consum the glori of hi forest, and of his
fruit field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a
standard-bear fainteth.

10:19 and the rest of the tree of hi forest shall be few, that a
child may write them.

10:20 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
israel, and such as are escap of the hous of jacob, shall no more
again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the lord, the
holi one of israel, in truth.

10:21 the remnant shall return, even the remnant of jacob, unto the
mighti god.

10:22 for though thi peopl israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remn of them shall return: the consumpt decre shall overflow
with righteousness.

10:23 for the lord god of host shall make a consumption, even
determined, in the midst of all the land.

10:24 therefor thu saith the lord god of hosts, O my peopl that
dwellest in zion, be not afraid of the assyrian: he shall smite thee
with a rod, and shall lift up hi staff against thee, after the manner
of egypt.

10:25 for yet a veri littl while, and the indign shall cease,
and mine anger in their destruction.

10:26 and the lord of host shall stir up a scourg for him according
to the slaughter of midian at the rock of oreb: and as hi rod was
upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of egypt.

10:27 and it shall come to pass in that day, that hi burden shall be
taken away from off thi shoulder, and hi yoke from off thi neck, and
th yoke shall be destroy becaus of the anointing.

10:28 He is come to aiath, he is pass to migron; at michmash he hath
laid up hi carriages: 10:29 they are gone over the passage: they have
taken up their lodg at geba; ramah is afraid; gibeah of saul is
fled.

10:30 lift up thi voice, O daughter of gallim: caus it to be heard
unto laish, O poor anathoth.

10:31 madmenah is removed; the inhabit of gebim gather themselves
to flee.

10:32 As yet shall he remain at nob that day: he shall shake hi hand
against the mount of the daughter of zion, the hill of jerusalem.

10:33 behold, the lord, the lord of hosts, shall lop the bough with
terror: and the high one of statur shall be hewn down, and the
haughti shall be humbled.

10:34 and he shall cut down the thicket of the forest with iron, and
lebanon shall fall by a mighti one.

11:1 and there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of jesse, and a
branch shall grow out of hi roots: 11:2 and the spirit of the lord
shal rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledg and of the fear
of the lord; 11:3 and shall make him of quick understand in the
fear of the lord: and he shall not judg after the sight of hi eyes,
neith reprov after the hear of hi ears: 11:4 but with
right shall he judg the poor, and reprov with equiti for the
meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth: with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of hi lip shall he slay the wicked.

11:5 and righteous shall be the girdl of hi loins, and
faith the girdl of hi reins.

11:6 the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall
li down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling
together; and a littl child shall lead them.

11:7 and the cow and the bear shall feed; their young one shall lie
down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

11:8 and the suck child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
wean child shall put hi hand on the cockatrice' den.

11:9 they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holi mountain: for the
earth shall be full of the knowledg of the lord, as the water cover
th sea.

11:10 and in that day there shall be a root of jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the gentil seek: and
hi rest shall be glorious.

11:11 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the lord shall set
hi hand again the second time to recov the remnant of hi people,
which shall be left, from assyria, and from egypt, and from pathros,
and from cush, and from elam, and from shinar, and from hamath, and
from the island of the sea.

11:12 and he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall
assembl the outcast of israel, and gather togeth the dispers of
judah from the four corner of the earth.

11:13 the envi also of ephraim shall depart, and the adversari of
judah shall be cut off: ephraim shall not envi judah, and judah shall
not vex ephraim.

11:14 but they shall fli upon the shoulder of the philistin toward
th west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay
their hand upon edom and moab; and the children of ammon shall obey
them.

11:15 and the lord shall utterli destroy the tongu of the egyptian
sea; and with hi mighti wind shall he shake hi hand over the river,
and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod.

11:16 and there shall be an highway for the remnant of hi people,
which shall be left, from assyria; like as it wa to israel in the day
that he came up out of the land of egypt.

12:1 and in that day thou shalt say, O lord, I will prais thee:
though thou wast angri with me, thine anger is turn away, and thou
comfortedst me.

12:2 behold, god is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for
th lord jehovah is my strength and my song; he also is becom my
salvation.

12:3 therefor with joy shall ye draw water out of the well of
salvation.

12:4 and in that day shall ye say, prais the lord, call upon his
name, declar hi do among the people, make mention that hi name
i exalted.

12:5 sing unto the lord; for he hath done excel things: thi is
known in all the earth.

12:6 cri out and shout, thou inhabit of zion: for great is the holy
on of israel in the midst of thee.

13:1 the burden of babylon, which isaiah the son of amoz did see.

13:2 lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voic unto
them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gate of the nobles.

13:3 I have command my sanctifi ones, I have also call my mighty
on for mine anger, even them that rejoic in my highness.

13:4 the nois of a multitud in the mountains, like as of a great
people; a tumultu nois of the kingdom of nation gathered
together: the lord of host mustereth the host of the battle.

13:5 they come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the
lord, and the weapon of hi indignation, to destroy the whole land.

13:6 howl ye; for the day of the lord is at hand; it shall come as a
destruct from the almighty.

13:7 therefor shall all hand be faint, and everi man' heart shall
melt: 13:8 and they shall be afraid: pang and sorrow shall take hold
of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall
b amaz one at another; their face shall be as flames.

13:9 behold, the day of the lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and
fierc anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the
sinn thereof out of it.

13:10 for the star of heaven and the constel thereof shall not
giv their light: the sun shall be darken in hi go forth, and
th moon shall not caus her light to shine.

13:11 and I will punish the world for their evil, and the wick for
their iniquity; and I will caus the arrog of the proud to cease,
and will lay low the haughti of the terrible.

13:12 I will make a man more preciou than fine gold; even a man than
th golden wedg of ophir.

13:13 therefor I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove
out of her place, in the wrath of the lord of hosts, and in the day of
hi fierc anger.

13:14 and it shall be as the chase roe, and as a sheep that no man
taketh up: they shall everi man turn to hi own people, and flee every
on into hi own land.

13:15 everi one that is found shall be thrust through; and everi one
that is join unto them shall fall by the sword.

13:16 their children also shall be dash to piec befor their eyes;
their hous shall be spoiled, and their wive ravished.

13:17 behold, I will stir up the mede against them, which shall not
regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.

13:18 their bow also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they
shal have no piti on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not
spar children.

13:19 and babylon, the glori of kingdoms, the beauti of the chaldees'
excellency, shall be as when god overthrew sodom and gomorrah.

13:20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
gener to generation: neither shall the arabian pitch tent there;
neith shall the shepherd make their fold there.

13:21 but wild beast of the desert shall lie there; and their houses
shal be full of dole creatures; and owl shall dwell there, and
satyr shall danc there.

13:22 and the wild beast of the island shall cri in their desolate
houses, and dragon in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to
come, and her day shall not be prolonged.

14:1 for the lord will have merci on jacob, and will yet choose
israel, and set them in their own land: and the stranger shall be
join with them, and they shall cleav to the hous of jacob.

14:2 and the peopl shall take them, and bring them to their place:
and the hous of israel shall possess them in the land of the lord for
serv and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose
capt they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

14:3 and it shall come to pass in the day that the lord shall give
the rest from thi sorrow, and from thi fear, and from the hard
bondag wherein thou wast made to serve, 14:4 that thou shalt take up
thi proverb against the king of babylon, and say, how hath the
oppressor ceased! the golden citi ceased!  14:5 the lord hath broken
th staff of the wicked, and the sceptr of the rulers.

14:6 He who smote the peopl in wrath with a continu stroke, he that
rul the nation in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth.

14:7 the whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into
singing.

14:8 yea, the fir tree rejoic at thee, and the cedar of lebanon,
saying, sinc thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.

14:9 hell from beneath is move for thee to meet thee at thi coming:
it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief one of the
earth; it hath rais up from their throne all the king of the
nations.

14:10 all they shall speak and say unto thee, art thou also become
weak as we? art thou becom like unto us?  14:11 thi pomp is brought
down to the grave, and the nois of thi viols: the worm is spread
und thee, and the worm cover thee.

14:12 how art thou fallen from heaven, O lucifer, son of the morning!
how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!
14:13 for thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, i
wil exalt my throne abov the star of god: I will sit also upon the
mount of the congregation, in the side of the north: 14:14 I will
ascend abov the height of the clouds; I will be like the most high.

14:15 yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the side of the pit.

14:16 they that see thee shall narrowli look upon thee, and consider
thee, saying, Is thi the man that made the earth to tremble, that did
shak kingdoms; 14:17 that made the world as a wilderness, and
destroy the citi thereof; that open not the hous of his
prisoners?  14:18 all the king of the nations, even all of them, lie
in glory, everi one in hi own house.

14:19 but thou art cast out of thi grave like an abomin branch,
and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a
sword, that go down to the stone of the pit; as a carcas trodden
und feet.

14:20 thou shalt not be join with them in burial, becaus thou hast
destroy thi land, and slain thi people: the seed of evildo shall
nev be renowned.

14:21 prepar slaughter for hi children for the iniqu of their
fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the
fac of the world with cities.

14:22 for I will rise up against them, saith the lord of hosts, and
cut off from babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith
th lord.

14:23 I will also make it a possess for the bittern, and pool of
water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the
lord of hosts.

14:24 the lord of host hath sworn, saying, sure as I have thought,
so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand:
14:25 that I will break the assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains
tread him under foot: then shall hi yoke depart from off them, and
hi burden depart from off their shoulders.

14:26 thi is the purpos that is purpos upon the whole earth: and
thi is the hand that is stretch out upon all the nations.

14:27 for the lord of host hath purposed, and who shall disannul it?
and hi hand is stretch out, and who shall turn it back?  14:28 in
th year that king ahaz die wa thi burden.

14:29 rejoic not thou, whole palestina, becaus the rod of him that
smot thee is broken: for out of the serpent' root shall come forth a
cockatrice, and hi fruit shall be a fieri fli serpent.

14:30 and the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needi shall
li down in safety: and I will kill thi root with famine, and he shall
slay thi remnant.

14:31 howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole palestina, art dissolved:
for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone
in hi appoint times.

14:32 what shall one then answer the messeng of the nation? that
th lord hath found zion, and the poor of hi peopl shall trust in
it.

15:1 the burden of moab. becaus in the night Ar of moab is laid
waste, and brought to silence; becaus in the night kir of moab is
laid waste, and brought to silence; 15:2 He is gone up to bajith, and
to dibon, the high places, to weep: moab shall howl over nebo, and
ov medeba: on all their head shall be baldness, and everi beard cut
off.

15:3 In their street they shall gird themselv with sackcloth: on
th top of their houses, and in their streets, everi one shall howl,
weep abundantly.

15:4 and heshbon shall cry, and elealeh: their voic shall be heard
even unto jahaz: therefor the arm soldier of moab shall cri out;
hi life shall be grievou unto him.

15:5 My heart shall cri out for moab; hi fugit shall flee unto
zoar, an heifer of three year old: for by the mount up of luhith
with weep shall they go it up; for in the way of horonaim they
shal rais up a cri of destruction.

15:6 for the water of nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is
with away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing.

15:7 therefor the abund they have gotten, and that which they
hav laid up, shall they carri away to the brook of the willows.

15:8 for the cri is gone round about the border of moab; the howling
thereof unto eglaim, and the howl thereof unto beerelim.

15:9 for the water of dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring
mor upon dimon, lion upon him that escapeth of moab, and upon the
remn of the land.

16:1 send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from sela to the
wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of zion.

16:2 for it shall be, that, as a wander bird cast out of the nest,
so the daughter of moab shall be at the ford of arnon.

16:3 take counsel, execut judgment; make thi shadow as the night in
th midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that
wandereth.

16:4 let mine outcast dwell with thee, moab; be thou a covert to them
from the face of the spoiler: for the extortion is at an end, the
spoil ceaseth, the oppressor are consum out of the land.

16:5 and in merci shall the throne be established: and he shall sit
upon it in truth in the tabernacl of david, judging, and seeking
judgment, and hast righteousness.

16:6 We have heard of the pride of moab; he is veri proud: even of his
haughtiness, and hi pride, and hi wrath: but hi lie shall not be
so.

16:7 therefor shall moab howl for moab, everi one shall howl: for the
found of kirhareseth shall ye mourn; sure they are stricken.

16:8 for the field of heshbon languish, and the vine of sibmah: the
lord of the heathen have broken down the princip plant thereof,
they are come even unto jazer, they wander through the wilderness:
h branch are stretch out, they are gone over the sea.

16:9 therefor I will bewail with the weep of jazer the vine of
sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O heshbon, and elealeh: for
th shout for thi summer fruit and for thi harvest is fallen.

16:10 and glad is taken away, and joy out of the plenti field;
and in the vineyard there shall be no singing, neither shall there be
shouting: the treader shall tread out no wine in their presses; i
hav made their vintag shout to cease.

16:11 wherefor my bowel shall sound like an harp for moab, and mine
inward part for kirharesh.

16:12 and it shall come to pass, when it is seen that moab is weari on
th high place, that he shall come to hi sanctuari to pray; but he
shal not prevail.

16:13 thi is the word that the lord hath spoken concern moab since
that time.

16:14 but now the lord hath spoken, saying, within three years, as the
year of an hireling, and the glori of moab shall be contemned, with
al that great multitude; and the remnant shall be veri small and
feeble.

17:1 the burden of damascus. behold, damascu is taken away from being
a city, and it shall be a ruinou heap.

17:2 the citi of aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which
shal lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

17:3 the fortress also shall ceas from ephraim, and the kingdom from
damascus, and the remnant of syria: they shall be as the glori of the
children of israel, saith the lord of hosts.

17:4 and in that day it shall come to pass, that the glori of jacob
shal be made thin, and the fat of hi flesh shall wax lean.

17:5 and it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and
reapeth the ear with hi arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth
ear in the valley of rephaim.

17:6 yet glean grape shall be left in it, as the shake of an
ol tree, two or three berri in the top of the uppermost bough,
four or five in the outmost fruit branch thereof, saith the lord
god of israel.

17:7 At that day shall a man look to hi maker, and hi eye shall
hav respect to the holi one of israel.

17:8 and he shall not look to the altars, the work of hi hands,
neith shall respect that which hi finger have made, either the
groves, or the images.

17:9 In that day shall hi strong citi be as a forsaken bough, and
an uppermost branch, which they left becaus of the children of
israel: and there shall be desolation.

17:10 becaus thou hast forgotten the god of thi salvation, and hast
not been mind of the rock of thi strength, therefor shalt thou
plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strang slips: 17:11 in
th day shalt thou make thi plant to grow, and in the morn shalt
thou make thi seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap in the
day of grief and of desper sorrow.

17:12 woe to the multitud of mani people, which make a nois like the
nois of the seas; and to the rush of nations, that make a rushing
lik the rush of mighti waters!  17:13 the nation shall rush like
th rush of mani waters: but god shall rebuk them, and they shall
fle far off, and shall be chase as the chaff of the mountain before
th wind, and like a roll thing befor the whirlwind.

17:14 and behold at eveningtid trouble; and befor the morn he is
not.

thi is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that
rob us.

18:1 woe to the land shadow with wings, which is beyond the rivers
of ethiopia: 18:2 that sendeth ambassador by the sea, even in vessels
of bulrush upon the waters, saying, go, ye swift messengers, to a
nat scatter and peeled, to a peopl terribl from their beginning
hitherto; a nation mete out and trodden down, whose land the rivers
hav spoiled!  18:3 all ye inhabit of the world, and dweller on
th earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and
when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye.

18:4 for so the lord said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will
consid in my dwell place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a
cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

18:5 for afor the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour
grap is ripen in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprig with
prun hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.

18:6 they shall be left togeth unto the fowl of the mountains, and
to the beast of the earth: and the fowl shall summer upon them, and
al the beast of the earth shall winter upon them.

18:7 In that time shall the present be brought unto the lord of hosts
of a peopl scatter and peeled, and from a peopl terribl from
their begin hitherto; a nation mete out and trodden under foot,
whos land the river have spoiled, to the place of the name of the
lord of hosts, the mount zion.

19:1 the burden of egypt. behold, the lord rideth upon a swift cloud,
and shall come into egypt: and the idol of egypt shall be move at
hi presence, and the heart of egypt shall melt in the midst of it.

19:2 and I will set the egyptian against the egyptians: and they
shal fight everi one against hi brother, and everi one against his
neighbour; citi against city, and kingdom against kingdom.

19:3 and the spirit of egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and i
wil destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols,
and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to
th wizards.

19:4 and the egyptian will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord;
and a fierc king shall rule over them, saith the lord, the lord of
hosts.

19:5 and the water shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be
wast and dri up.

19:6 and they shall turn the river far away; and the brook of
def shall be empti and dri up: the reed and flag shall
wither.

19:7 the paper reed by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and
everi thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be
no more.

19:8 the fisher also shall mourn, and all they that cast angl into
th brook shall lament, and they that spread net upon the waters
shal languish.

19:9 moreov they that work in fine flax, and they that weave
networks, shall be confounded.

19:10 and they shall be broken in the purpos thereof, all that make
sluic and pond for fish.

19:11 sure the princ of zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise
counsellor of pharaoh is becom brutish: how say ye unto pharaoh, i
am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?  19:12 where are
they? where are thi wise men? and let them tell thee now, and let them
know what the lord of host hath purpos upon egypt.

19:13 the princ of zoan are becom fools, the princ of noph are
deceived; they have also seduc egypt, even they that are the stay of
th tribe thereof.

19:14 the lord hath mingl a pervers spirit in the midst thereof:
and they have caus egypt to err in everi work thereof, as a drunken
man staggereth in hi vomit.

19:15 neither shall there be ani work for egypt, which the head or
tail, branch or rush, may do.

19:16 In that day shall egypt be like unto women: and it shall be
afraid and fear becaus of the shake of the hand of the lord of
hosts, which he shaketh over it.

19:17 and the land of judah shall be a terror unto egypt, everi one
that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, becaus of the
counsel of the lord of hosts, which he hath determin against it.

19:18 In that day shall five citi in the land of egypt speak the
languag of canaan, and swear to the lord of hosts; one shall be
called, the citi of destruction.

19:19 In that day shall there be an altar to the lord in the midst of
th land of egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the lord.

19:20 and it shall be for a sign and for a wit unto the lord of
host in the land of egypt: for they shall cri unto the lord because
of the oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one,
and he shall deliv them.

19:21 and the lord shall be known to egypt, and the egyptian shall
know the lord in that day, and shall do sacrific and oblation; yea,
they shall vow a vow unto the lord, and perform it.

19:22 and the lord shall smite egypt: he shall smite and heal it: and
they shall return even to the lord, and he shall be intreat of them,
and shall heal them.

19:23 In that day shall there be a highway out of egypt to assyria,
and the assyrian shall come into egypt, and the egyptian into assyria,
and the egyptian shall serv with the assyrians.

19:24 In that day shall israel be the third with egypt and with
assyria, even a bless in the midst of the land: 19:25 whom the lord
of host shall bless, saying, bless be egypt my people, and assyria
th work of my hands, and israel mine inheritance.

20:1 In the year that tartan came unto ashdod, (when sargon the king
of assyria sent him,) and fought against ashdod, and took it; 20:2 at
th same time spake the lord by isaiah the son of amoz, saying, Go and
loos the sackcloth from off thi loins, and put off thi shoe from thy
foot. and he did so, walk nake and barefoot.

20:3 and the lord said, like as my servant isaiah hath walk naked
and barefoot three year for a sign and wonder upon egypt and upon
ethiopia; 20:4 So shall the king of assyria lead away the egyptians
prisoners, and the ethiopian captives, young and old, nake and
barefoot, even with their buttock uncovered, to the shame of egypt.

20:5 and they shall be afraid and asham of ethiopia their
expectation, and of egypt their glory.

20:6 and the inhabit of thi isl shall say in that day, behold,
such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be deliv from
th king of assyria: and how shall we escape?  21:1 the burden of the
desert of the sea. As whirlwind in the south pass through; so it
cometh from the desert, from a terribl land.

21:2 A grievou vision is declar unto me; the treacher dealer
dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O elam:
besiege, O media; all the sigh thereof have I made to cease.

21:3 therefor are my loin fill with pain: pang have taken hold
upon me, as the pang of a woman that travaileth: I wa bow down at
th hear of it; I wa dismay at the see of it.

21:4 My heart panted, fear affright me: the night of my
pleasur hath he turn into fear unto me.

21:5 prepar the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye
princes, and anoint the shield.

21:6 for thu hath the lord said unto me, go, set a watchman, let him
declar what he seeth.

21:7 and he saw a chariot with a coupl of horsemen, a chariot of
asses, and a chariot of camels; and he hearken dilig with much
heed: 21:8 and he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand continu upon the
watchtow in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights: 21:9
and, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a coupl of horsemen.

and he answer and said, babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the
graven imag of her god he hath broken unto the ground.

21:10 O my threshing, and the corn of my floor: that which I have
heard of the lord of hosts, the god of israel, have I declar unto
you.

21:11 the burden of dumah. He calleth to me out of seir, watchman,
what of the night? watchman, what of the night?  21:12 the watchman
said, the morn cometh, and also the night: if ye will enquire,
enquir ye: return, come.

21:13 the burden upon arabia. In the forest in arabia shall ye lodge,
o ye travel compani of dedanim.

21:14 the inhabit of the land of tema brought water to him that
wa thirsty, they prevent with their bread him that fled.

21:15 for they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from
th bent bow, and from the grievous of war.

21:16 for thu hath the lord said unto me, within a year, accord to
th year of an hireling, and all the glori of kedar shall fail: 21:17
and the residu of the number of archers, the mighti men of the
children of kedar, shall be diminished: for the lord god of israel
hath spoken it.

22:1 the burden of the valley of vision. what aileth thee now, that
thou art wholli gone up to the housetops?  22:2 thou that art full of
stirs, a tumultu city, joyou city: thi slain men are not slain
with the sword, nor dead in battle.

22:3 all thi ruler are fled together, they are bound by the archers:
al that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from
far.

22:4 therefor said I, look away from me; I will weep bitterly, labour
not to comfort me, becaus of the spoil of the daughter of my
people.

22:5 for it is a day of trouble, and of tread down, and of
perplex by the lord god of host in the valley of vision, breaking
down the walls, and of cri to the mountains.

22:6 and elam bare the quiver with chariot of men and horsemen, and
kir uncov the shield.

22:7 and it shall come to pass, that thi choicest valley shall be
ful of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselv in array at
th gate.

22:8 and he discov the cover of judah, and thou didst look in
that day to the armour of the hous of the forest.

22:9 Ye have seen also the breach of the citi of david, that they
ar many: and ye gather togeth the water of the lower pool.

22:10 and ye have number the hous of jerusalem, and the houses
hav ye broken down to fortifi the wall.

22:11 Ye made also a ditch between the two wall for the water of the
old pool: but ye have not look unto the maker thereof, neither had
respect unto him that fashion it long ago.

22:12 and in that day did the lord god of host call to weeping, and
to mourning, and to baldness, and to gird with sackcloth: 22:13 and
behold joy and gladness, slay oxen, and kill sheep, eating
flesh, and drink wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall
die.

22:14 and it wa reveal in mine ear by the lord of hosts, surely
thi iniqu shall not be purg from you till ye die, saith the lord
god of hosts.

22:15 thu saith the lord god of hosts, go, get thee unto this
treasurer, even unto shebna, which is over the house, and say, 22:16
what hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed
the out a sepulchr here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchr on
high, and that graveth an habit for himself in a rock?  22:17
behold, the lord will carri thee away with a mighti captivity, and
wil sure cover thee.

22:18 He will sure violent turn and toss thee like a ball into a
larg country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariot of thy
glori shall be the shame of thi lord' house.

22:19 and I will drive thee from thi station, and from thi state shall
h pull thee down.

22:20 and it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my
serv eliakim the son of hilkiah: 22:21 and I will cloth him with
thi robe, and strengthen him with thi girdle, and I will commit thy
govern into hi hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants
of jerusalem, and to the hous of judah.

22:22 and the key of the hous of david will I lay upon hi shoulder;
so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none
shal open.

22:23 and I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be
for a gloriou throne to hi father' house.

22:24 and they shall hang upon him all the glori of hi father's
house, the offspr and the issue, all vessel of small quantity,
from the vessel of cups, even to all the vessel of flagons.

22:25 In that day, saith the lord of hosts, shall the nail that is
fasten in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and
th burden that wa upon it shall be cut off: for the lord hath spoken
it.

23:1 the burden of tyre. howl, ye ship of tarshish; for it is laid
waste, so that there is no house, no enter in: from the land of
chittim it is reveal to them.

23:2 Be still, ye inhabit of the isle; thou whom the merchant of
zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.

23:3 and by great water the seed of sihor, the harvest of the river,
i her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.

23:4 Be thou ashamed, O zidon: for the sea hath spoken, even the
strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children,
neith do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins.

23:5 As at the report concern egypt, so shall they be sore pained
at the report of tyre.

23:6 pass ye over to tarshish; howl, ye inhabit of the isle.

23:7 Is thi your joyou city, whose antiqu is of ancient days? her
own feet shall carri her afar off to sojourn.

23:8 who hath taken thi counsel against tyre, the crown city,
whos merchant are princes, whose traffick are the honour of
th earth?  23:9 the lord of host hath purpos it, to stain the
prid of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honour of
th earth.

23:10 pass through thi land as a river, O daughter of tarshish: there
i no more strength.

23:11 He stretch out hi hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms:
th lord hath given a command against the merchant city, to
destroy the strong hold thereof.

23:12 and he said, thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed
virgin, daughter of zidon: arise, pass over to chittim; there also
shalt thou have no rest.

23:13 behold the land of the chaldeans; thi peopl wa not, till the
assyrian found it for them that dwell in the wilderness: they set up
th tower thereof, they rais up the palac thereof; and he brought
it to ruin.

23:14 howl, ye ship of tarshish: for your strength is laid waste.

23:15 and it shall come to pass in that day, that tyre shall be
forgotten seventi years, accord to the day of one king: after the
end of seventi year shall tyre sing as an harlot.

23:16 take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been
forgotten; make sweet melody, sing mani songs, that thou mayest be
remembered.

23:17 and it shall come to pass after the end of seventi years, that
th lord will visit tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall
commit fornic with all the kingdom of the world upon the face of
th earth.

23:18 and her merchandis and her hire shall be holi to the lord:
it shall not be treasur nor laid up; for her merchandis shall be
for them that dwell befor the lord, to eat sufficiently, and for
dur clothing.

24:1 behold, the lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and
turneth it upsid down, and scattereth abroad the inhabit thereof.

24:2 and it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with
th servant, so with hi master; as with the maid, so with her
mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender,
so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of
usuri to him.

24:3 the land shall be utterli emptied, and utterli spoiled: for the
lord hath spoken thi word.

24:4 the earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and
fadeth away, the haughti peopl of the earth do languish.

24:5 the earth also is defil under the inhabit thereof; because
they have transgress the laws, chang the ordinance, broken the
everlast covenant.

24:6 therefor hath the curs devour the earth, and they that dwell
therein are desolate: therefor the inhabit of the earth are
burned, and few men left.

24:7 the new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted
do sigh.

24:8 the mirth of tabret ceaseth, the nois of them that rejoice
endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.

24:9 they shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be
bitt to them that drink it.

24:10 the citi of confus is broken down: everi hous is shut up,
that no man may come in.

24:11 there is a cri for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened,
th mirth of the land is gone.

24:12 In the citi is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with
destruction.

24:13 when thu it shall be in the midst of the land among the people,
ther shall be as the shake of an oliv tree, and as the gleaning
grap when the vintag is done.

24:14 they shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty
of the lord, they shall cri aloud from the sea.

24:15 wherefor glorifi ye the lord in the fires, even the name of the
lord god of israel in the isl of the sea.

24:16 from the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even
glori to the righteous. but I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto
me! the treacher dealer have dealt treacherously; yea, the
treacher dealer have dealt veri treacherously.

24:17 fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabit of
th earth.

24:18 and it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the nois of
th fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the
midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the window from on
high are open, and the foundat of the earth do shake.

24:19 the earth is utterli broken down, the earth is clean dissolved,
th earth is move exceedingly.

24:20 the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be
remov like a cottage; and the transgress thereof shall be heavy
upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.

24:21 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the lord shall
punish the host of the high one that are on high, and the king of
th earth upon the earth.

24:22 and they shall be gather together, as prison are gathered
in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after mani days
shal they be visited.

24:23 then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the
lord of host shall reign in mount zion, and in jerusalem, and before
hi ancient gloriously.

25:1 O lord, thou art my god; I will exalt thee, I will prais thy
name; for thou hast done wonder things; thi counsel of old are
faith and truth.

25:2 for thou hast made of a citi an heap; of a defenc citi a ruin:
a palac of stranger to be no city; it shall never be built.

25:3 therefor shall the strong peopl glorifi thee, the citi of the
terr nation shall fear thee.

25:4 for thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the
needi in hi distress, a refug from the storm, a shadow from the
heat, when the blast of the terribl one is as a storm against the
wall.

25:5 thou shalt bring down the nois of strangers, as the heat in a
dri place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the
terr one shall be brought low.

25:6 and in thi mountain shall the lord of host make unto all people
a feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the lees, of fat things
ful of marrow, of wine on the lee well refined.

25:7 and he will destroy in thi mountain the face of the covering
cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations.

25:8 He will swallow up death in victory; and the lord god will wipe
away tear from off all faces; and the rebuk of hi peopl shall he
tak away from off all the earth: for the lord hath spoken it.

25:9 and it shall be said in that day, lo, thi is our god; we have
wait for him, and he will save us: thi is the lord; we have waited
for him, we will be glad and rejoic in hi salvation.

25:10 for in thi mountain shall the hand of the lord rest, and moab
shal be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the
dunghill.

25:11 and he shall spread forth hi hand in the midst of them, as he
that swimmeth spreadeth forth hi hand to swim: and he shall bring
down their pride togeth with the spoil of their hands.

25:12 and the fortress of the high fort of thi wall shall he bring
down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.

26:1 In that day shall thi song be sung in the land of judah; We have
a strong city; salvat will god appoint for wall and bulwarks.

26:2 open ye the gates, that the righteou nation which keepeth the
truth may enter in.

26:3 thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stay on
thee: becaus he trusteth in thee.

26:4 trust ye in the lord for ever: for in the lord jehovah is
everlast strength: 26:5 for he bringeth down them that dwell on
high; the lofti city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the
ground; he bringeth it even to the dust.

26:6 the foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the
step of the needy.

26:7 the way of the just is uprightness: thou, most upright, dost
weigh the path of the just.

26:8 yea, in the way of thi judgments, O lord, have we wait for
thee; the desir of our soul is to thi name, and to the remembr of
thee.

26:9 with my soul have I desir thee in the night; yea, with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thi judgment are in
th earth, the inhabit of the world will learn righteousness.

26:10 let favour be shew to the wicked, yet will he not learn
righteousness: in the land of upright will he deal unjustly, and
wil not behold the majesti of the lord.

26:11 lord, when thi hand is lift up, they will not see: but they
shal see, and be asham for their envi at the people; yea, the fire
of thine enemi shall devour them.

26:12 lord, thou wilt ordain peac for us: for thou also hast wrought
al our work in us.

26:13 O lord our god, other lord besid thee have had dominion over
us: but by thee onli will we make mention of thi name.

26:14 they are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they
shal not rise: therefor hast thou visit and destroy them, and
mad all their memori to perish.

26:15 thou hast increas the nation, O lord, thou hast increas the
nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst remov it far unto all the
end of the earth.

26:16 lord, in troubl have they visit thee, they pour out a
pray when thi chasten wa upon them.

26:17 like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her
delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in
thi sight, O lord.

26:18 We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it
wer brought forth wind; we have not wrought ani deliver in the
earth; neither have the inhabit of the world fallen.

26:19 thi dead men shall live, togeth with my dead bodi shall they
arise. awak and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thi dew is as the
dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

26:20 come, my people, enter thou into thi chambers, and shut thy
door about thee: hide thyself as it were for a littl moment, until
th indign be overpast.

26:21 for, behold, the lord cometh out of hi place to punish the
inhabit of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall
disclos her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

27:1 In that day the lord with hi sore and great and strong sword
shal punish leviathan the pierc serpent, even leviathan that
crook serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.

27:2 In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine.

27:3 I the lord do keep it; I will water it everi moment: lest any
hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

27:4 furi is not in me: who would set the brier and thorn against me
in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together.

27:5 Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peac with
me; and he shall make peac with me.

27:6 He shall caus them that come of jacob to take root: israel shall
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.

27:7 hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he
slain accord to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?  27:8
in measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debat with it: he
stayeth hi rough wind in the day of the east wind.

27:9 By thi therefor shall the iniqu of jacob be purged; and this
i all the fruit to take away hi sin; when he maketh all the stones
of the altar as chalkston that are beaten in sunder, the grove and
imag shall not stand up.

27:10 yet the defenc citi shall be desolate, and the habitation
forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and
ther shall he lie down, and consum the branch thereof.

27:11 when the bough thereof are withered, they shall be broken off:
th women come, and set them on fire: for it is a peopl of no
understanding: therefor he that made them will not have merci on
them, and he that form them will shew them no favour.

27:12 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the lord shall beat
off from the channel of the river unto the stream of egypt, and ye
shal be gather one by one, O ye children of israel.

27:13 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet
shal be blown, and they shall come which were readi to perish in the
land of assyria, and the outcast in the land of egypt, and shall
worship the lord in the holi mount at jerusalem.

28:1 woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkard of ephraim, whose
glori beauti is a fade flower, which are on the head of the fat
valley of them that are overcom with wine!  28:2 behold, the lord
hath a mighti and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a
destroy storm, as a flood of mighti water overflowing, shall cast
down to the earth with the hand.

28:3 the crown of pride, the drunkard of ephraim, shall be trodden
und feet: 28:4 and the gloriou beauty, which is on the head of the
fat valley, shall be a fade flower, and as the hasti fruit before
th summer; which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet
in hi hand he eateth it up.

28:5 In that day shall the lord of host be for a crown of glory, and
for a diadem of beauty, unto the residu of hi people, 28:6 and for a
spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength
to them that turn the battl to the gate.

28:7 but they also have er through wine, and through strong drink
ar out of the way; the priest and the prophet have er through
strong drink, they are swallow up of wine, they are out of the way
through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumbl in judgment.

28:8 for all tabl are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is
no place clean.

28:9 whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to
understand doctrine? them that are wean from the milk, and drawn
from the breasts.

28:10 for precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line
upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little: 28:11
for with stammer lip and anoth tongu will he speak to this
people.

28:12 To whom he said, thi is the rest wherewith ye may caus the
weari to rest; and thi is the refreshing: yet they would not hear.

28:13 but the word of the lord wa unto them precept upon precept,
precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little,
and there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be
broken, and snared, and taken.

28:14 wherefor hear the word of the lord, ye scorn men, that rule
thi peopl which is in jerusalem.

28:15 becaus ye have said, We have made a coven with death, and
with hell are we at agreement; when the overflow scourg shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lie our refuge,
and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: 28:16 therefor thu saith
th lord god, behold, I lay in zion for a foundat a stone, a tried
stone, a preciou corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth
shal not make haste.

28:17 judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteous to the
plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refug of lies, and the
wat shall overflow the hide place.

28:18 and your coven with death shall be disannulled, and your
agr with hell shall not stand; when the overflow scourge
shal pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.

28:19 from the time that it goeth forth it shall take you: for morning
bi morn shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall be a
vex onli to understand the report.

28:20 for the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on
it: and the cover narrow than that he can wrap himself in it.

28:21 for the lord shall rise up as in mount perazim, he shall be
wroth as in the valley of gibeon, that he may do hi work, hi strange
work; and bring to pass hi act, hi strang act.

28:22 now therefor be ye not mockers, lest your band be made strong:
for I have heard from the lord god of host a consumption, even
determin upon the whole earth.

28:23 give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.

28:24 doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the
clod of hi ground?  28:25 when he hath made plain the face thereof,
doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast
in the princip wheat and the appoint barley and the rie in their
place?  28:26 for hi god doth instruct him to discretion, and doth
teach him.

28:27 for the fitch are not thresh with a thresh instrument,
neith is a cart wheel turn about upon the cummin; but the fitches
ar beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.

28:28 bread corn is bruised; becaus he will not ever be thresh it,
nor break it with the wheel of hi cart, nor bruis it with his
horsemen.

28:29 thi also cometh forth from the lord of hosts, which is
wond in counsel, and excel in working.

29:1 woe to ariel, to ariel, the citi where david dwelt! add ye year
to year; let them kill sacrifices.

29:2 yet I will distress ariel, and there shall be heavi and
sorrow: and it shall be unto me as ariel.

29:3 and I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege
against thee with a mount, and I will rais fort against thee.

29:4 and thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the
ground, and thi speech shall be low out of the dust, and thi voice
shal be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground,
and thi speech shall whisper out of the dust.

29:5 moreov the multitud of thi stranger shall be like small dust,
and the multitud of the terribl one shall be as chaff that passeth
away: yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.

29:6 thou shalt be visit of the lord of host with thunder, and with
earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of
devour fire.

29:7 and the multitud of all the nation that fight against ariel,
even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress
her, shall be as a dream of a night vision.

29:8 It shall even be as when an hungri man dreameth, and, behold, he
eateth; but he awaketh, and hi soul is empty: or as when a thirsty
man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold,
h is faint, and hi soul hath appetite: so shall the multitud of all
th nation be, that fight against mount zion.

29:9 stay yourselves, and wonder; cri ye out, and cry: they are
drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.

29:10 for the lord hath pour out upon you the spirit of deep sleep,
and hath close your eyes: the prophet and your rulers, the seers
hath he covered.

29:11 and the vision of all is becom unto you as the word of a book
that is sealed, which men deliv to one that is learned, saying, read
this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed: 29:12 and
th book is deliv to him that is not learned, saying, read this, i
pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.

29:13 wherefor the lord said, forasmuch as thi peopl draw near me
with their mouth, and with their lip do honour me, but have removed
their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the
precept of men: 29:14 therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a
marvel work among thi people, even a marvel work and a
wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understand of their prudent men shall be hid.

29:15 woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the
lord, and their work are in the dark, and they say, who seeth us? and
who knoweth us?  29:16 sure your turn of thing upsid down shall
b esteem as the potter' clay: for shall the work say of him that
mad it, He made me not? or shall the thing frame say of him that
fram it, He had no understanding?  29:17 Is it not yet a veri little
while, and lebanon shall be turn into a fruit field, and the
fruit field shall be esteem as a forest?  29:18 and in that day
shal the deaf hear the word of the book, and the eye of the blind
shal see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.

29:19 the meek also shall increas their joy in the lord, and the poor
among men shall rejoic in the holi one of israel.

29:20 for the terribl one is brought to nought, and the scorner is
consumed, and all that watch for iniqu are cut off: 29:21 that make
a man an offend for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth
in the gate, and turn asid the just for a thing of nought.

29:22 therefor thu saith the lord, who redeem abraham, concerning
th hous of jacob, jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his
fac now wax pale.

29:23 but when he seeth hi children, the work of mine hands, in the
midst of him, they shall sanctifi my name, and sanctifi the holi one
of jacob, and shall fear the god of israel.

29:24 they also that er in spirit shall come to understanding, and
they that murmur shall learn doctrine.

30:1 woe to the rebelli children, saith the lord, that take
counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my
spirit, that they may add sin to sin: 30:2 that walk to go down into
egypt, and have not ask at my mouth; to strengthen themselv in the
strength of pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of egypt!  30:3
therefor shall the strength of pharaoh be your shame, and the trust
in the shadow of egypt your confusion.

30:4 for hi princ were at zoan, and hi ambassador came to hanes.

30:5 they were all asham of a peopl that could not profit them, nor
b an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.

30:6 the burden of the beast of the south: into the land of trouble
and anguish, from whenc come the young and old lion, the viper and
fieri fli serpent, they will carri their rich upon the shoulders
of young asses, and their treasur upon the bunch of camels, to a
peopl that shall not profit them.

30:7 for the egyptian shall help in vain, and to no purpose:
therefor have I cri concern this, their strength is to sit
still.

30:8 now go, write it befor them in a table, and note it in a book,
that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever: 30:9 that this
i a rebelli people, lie children, children that will not hear
th law of the lord: 30:10 which say to the seers, see not; and to the
prophets, prophesi not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth
things, prophesi deceits: 30:11 get you out of the way, turn asid out
of the path, caus the holi one of israel to ceas from befor us.

30:12 wherefor thu saith the holi one of israel, becaus ye despise
thi word, and trust in oppress and perverseness, and stay thereon:
30:13 therefor thi iniqu shall be to you as a breach readi to
fall, swell out in a high wall, whose break cometh suddenli at
an instant.

30:14 and he shall break it as the break of the potters' vessel
that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not
b found in the burst of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth,
or to take water withal out of the pit.

30:15 for thu saith the lord god, the holi one of israel; in
return and rest shall ye be saved; in quiet and in confidence
shal be your strength: and ye would not.

30:16 but ye said, no; for we will flee upon horses; therefor shall
y flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefor shall they that
pursu you be swift.

30:17 one thousand shall flee at the rebuk of one; at the rebuk of
fiv shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a
mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.

30:18 and therefor will the lord wait, that he may be graciou unto
you, and therefor will he be exalted, that he may have merci upon
you: for the lord is a god of judgment: bless are all they that wait
for him.

30:19 for the peopl shall dwell in zion at jerusalem: thou shalt weep
no more: he will be veri graciou unto thee at the voic of thi cry;
when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.

30:20 and though the lord give you the bread of adversity, and the
wat of affliction, yet shall not thi teacher be remov into a
corn ani more, but thine eye shall see thi teachers: 30:21 and
thin ear shall hear a word behind thee, saying, thi is the way,
walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the
left.

30:22 Ye shall defil also the cover of thi graven imag of
silver, and the ornament of thi molten imag of gold: thou shalt cast
them away as a menstruou cloth; thou shalt say unto it, get thee
hence.

30:23 then shall he give the rain of thi seed, that thou shalt sow the
ground withal; and bread of the increas of the earth, and it shall be
fat and plenteous: in that day shall thi cattl feed in large
pastures.

30:24 the oxen likewis and the young ass that ear the ground shall
eat clean provender, which hath been winnow with the shovel and with
th fan.

30:25 and there shall be upon everi high mountain, and upon everi high
hill, river and stream of water in the day of the great slaughter,
when the tower fall.

30:26 moreov the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the lord bindeth up the breach of hi people,
and healeth the stroke of their wound.

30:27 behold, the name of the lord cometh from far, burn with his
anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: hi lip are full of
indignation, and hi tongu as a devour fire: 30:28 and hi breath,
a an overflow stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to
sift the nation with the siev of vanity: and there shall be a bridle
in the jaw of the people, caus them to err.

30:29 Ye shall have a song, as in the night when a holi solemn is
kept; and glad of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come
into the mountain of the lord, to the mighti one of israel.

30:30 and the lord shall caus hi gloriou voic to be heard, and
shal shew the light down of hi arm, with the indign of his
anger, and with the flame of a devour fire, with scattering, and
tempest, and hailstones.

30:31 for through the voic of the lord shall the assyrian be beaten
down, which smote with a rod.

30:32 and in everi place where the ground staff shall pass, which
th lord shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabret and harps: and
in battl of shake will he fight with it.

30:33 for tophet is ordain of old; yea, for the king it is prepared;
h hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much
wood; the breath of the lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle
it.

31:1 woe to them that go down to egypt for help; and stay on horses,
and trust in chariots, becaus they are many; and in horsemen, because
they are veri strong; but they look not unto the holi one of israel,
neith seek the lord!  31:2 yet he also is wise, and will bring evil,
and will not call back hi words: but will aris against the hous of
th evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.

31:3 now the egyptian are men, and not god; and their hors flesh,
and not spirit. when the lord shall stretch out hi hand, both he that
helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they
al shall fail together.

31:4 for thu hath the lord spoken unto me, like as the lion and the
young lion roar on hi prey, when a multitud of shepherd is
cal forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor
abas himself for the nois of them: so shall the lord of host come
down to fight for mount zion, and for the hill thereof.

31:5 As bird flying, so will the lord of host defend jerusalem;
defend also he will deliv it; and pass over he will preserve
it.

31:6 turn ye unto him from whom the children of israel have deeply
revolted.

31:7 for in that day everi man shall cast away hi idol of silver,
and hi idol of gold, which your own hand have made unto you for a
sin.

31:8 then shall the assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighti man;
and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee
from the sword, and hi young men shall be discomfited.

31:9 and he shall pass over to hi strong hold for fear, and his
princ shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the lord, whose fire is
in zion, and hi furnac in jerusalem.

32:1 behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princ shall
rul in judgment.

32:2 and a man shall be as an hide place from the wind, and a covert
from the tempest; as river of water in a dri place, as the shadow of
a great rock in a weari land.

32:3 and the eye of them that see shall not be dim, and the ear of
them that hear shall hearken.

32:4 the heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the
tongu of the stammer shall be readi to speak plainly.

32:5 the vile person shall be no more call liberal, nor the churl
said to be bountiful.

32:6 for the vile person will speak villany, and hi heart will work
iniquity, to practis hypocrisy, and to utter error against the lord,
to make empti the soul of the hungry, and he will caus the drink of
th thirsti to fail.

32:7 the instrument also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked
devic to destroy the poor with lie words, even when the needy
speaketh right.

32:8 but the liber deviseth liber things; and by liber things
shal he stand.

32:9 rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless
daughters; give ear unto my speech.

32:10 mani day and year shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for
th vintag shall fail, the gather shall not come.

32:11 tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless
ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your
loins.

32:12 they shall lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for
th fruit vine.

32:13 upon the land of my peopl shall come up thorn and briers; yea,
upon all the hous of joy in the joyou city: 32:14 becaus the
palac shall be forsaken; the multitud of the citi shall be left;
th fort and tower shall be for den for ever, a joy of wild asses,
a pastur of flocks; 32:15 until the spirit be pour upon us from on
high, and the wilder be a fruit field, and the fruit field
b count for a forest.

32:16 then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness
remain in the fruit field.

32:17 and the work of righteous shall be peace; and the effect of
right quiet and assur for ever.

32:18 and my peopl shall dwell in a peaceabl habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet rest places; 32:19 when it shall hail,
com down on the forest; and the citi shall be low in a low place.

32:20 bless are ye that sow besid all waters, that send forth
thith the feet of the ox and the ass.

33:1 woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacher with thee! when thou
shalt ceas to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make
an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacher with thee.

33:2 O lord, be graciou unto us; we have wait for thee: be thou
their arm everi morning, our salvat also in the time of trouble.

33:3 At the nois of the tumult the peopl fled; at the lift up of
thyself the nation were scattered.

33:4 and your spoil shall be gather like the gather of the
caterpiller: as the run to and fro of locust shall he run upon
them.

33:5 the lord is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath fill zion
with judgment and righteousness.

33:6 and wisdom and knowledg shall be the stabil of thi times, and
strength of salvation: the fear of the lord is hi treasure.

33:7 behold, their valiant one shall cri without: the ambassador of
peac shall weep bitterly.

33:8 the highway lie waste, the wayfar man ceaseth: he hath broken
th covenant, he hath despis the cities, he regardeth no man.

33:9 the earth mourneth and languisheth: lebanon is asham and hewn
down: sharon is like a wilderness; and bashan and carmel shake off
their fruits.

33:10 now will I rise, saith the lord; now will I be exalted; now will
i lift up myself.

33:11 Ye shall conceiv chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your
breath, as fire, shall devour you.

33:12 and the peopl shall be as the burn of lime: as thorn cut
up shall they be burn in the fire.

33:13 hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are
near, acknowledg my might.

33:14 the sinner in zion are afraid; fear hath surpris the
hypocrites. who among us shall dwell with the devour fire? who
among us shall dwell with everlast burnings?  33:15 He that walketh
righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of
oppressions, that shaketh hi hand from hold of bribes, that
stoppeth hi ear from hear of blood, and shutteth hi eye from
se evil; 33:16 He shall dwell on high: hi place of defenc shall
b the munit of rocks: bread shall be given him; hi water shall
b sure.

33:17 thine eye shall see the king in hi beauty: they shall behold
th land that is veri far off.

33:18 thine heart shall medit terror. where is the scribe? where is
th receiver? where is he that count the towers?  33:19 thou shalt
not see a fierc people, a peopl of a deeper speech than thou canst
perceive; of a stammer tongue, that thou canst not understand.

33:20 look upon zion, the citi of our solemnities: thine eye shall
se jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacl that shall not be taken
down; not one of the stake thereof shall ever be removed, neither
shal ani of the cord thereof be broken.

33:21 but there the gloriou lord will be unto us a place of broad
riv and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither
shal gallant ship pass thereby.

33:22 for the lord is our judge, the lord is our lawgiver, the lord is
our king; he will save us.

33:23 thi tackl are loosed; they could not well strengthen their
mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great
spoil divided; the lame take the prey.

33:24 and the inhabit shall not say, I am sick: the peopl that
dwel therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

34:1 come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the
earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all thing that
com forth of it.

34:2 for the indign of the lord is upon all nations, and hi fury
upon all their armies: he hath utterli destroy them, he hath
deliv them to the slaughter.

34:3 their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up
out of their carcases, and the mountain shall be melt with their
blood.

34:4 and all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens
shal be roll togeth as a scroll: and all their host shall fall
down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a fall fig from
th fig tree.

34:5 for my sword shall be bath in heaven: behold, it shall come
down upon idumea, and upon the peopl of my curse, to judgment.

34:6 the sword of the lord is fill with blood, it is made fat with
fatness, and with the blood of lamb and goats, with the fat of the
kidney of rams: for the lord hath a sacrific in bozrah, and a great
slaught in the land of idumea.

34:7 and the unicorn shall come down with them, and the bullock with
th bulls; and their land shall be soak with blood, and their dust
mad fat with fatness.

34:8 for it is the day of the lord' vengeance, and the year of
recomp for the controversi of zion.

34:9 and the stream thereof shall be turn into pitch, and the dust
thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall becom burning
pitch.

34:10 It shall not be quench night nor day; the smoke thereof shall
go up for ever: from gener to gener it shall lie waste; none
shal pass through it for ever and ever.

34:11 but the cormor and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also
and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the
lin of confusion, and the stone of emptiness.

34:12 they shall call the nobl thereof to the kingdom, but none
shal be there, and all her princ shall be nothing.

34:13 and thorn shall come up in her palaces, nettl and brambl in
th fortress thereof: and it shall be an habit of dragons, and
a court for owls.

34:14 the wild beast of the desert shall also meet with the wild
beast of the island, and the satyr shall cri to hi fellow; the
screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of
rest.

34:15 there shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and
gath under her shadow: there shall the vultur also be gathered,
everi one with her mate.

34:16 seek ye out of the book of the lord, and read: no one of these
shal fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded,
and hi spirit it hath gather them.

34:17 and he hath cast the lot for them, and hi hand hath divid it
unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from gener to
gener shall they dwell therein.

35:1 the wilder and the solitari place shall be glad for them; and
th desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

35:2 It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoic even with joy and
singing: the glori of lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency
of carmel and sharon, they shall see the glori of the lord, and the
excel of our god.

35:3 strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feebl knees.

35:4 say to them that are of a fear heart, Be strong, fear not:
behold, your god will come with vengeance, even god with a recompence;
h will come and save you.

35:5 then the eye of the blind shall be opened, and the ear of the
deaf shall be unstopped.

35:6 then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongu of the
dumb sing: for in the wilder shall water break out, and streams
in the desert.

35:7 and the parch ground shall becom a pool, and the thirsti land
spr of water: in the habit of dragons, where each lay, shall
b grass with reed and rushes.

35:8 and an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called
th way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall
b for those: the wayfar men, though fools, shall not err therein.

35:9 No lion shall be there, nor ani raven beast shall go up
thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeem shall walk
there: 35:10 and the ransom of the lord shall return, and come to
zion with song and everlast joy upon their heads: they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sigh shall flee away.

36:1 now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king hezekiah, that
sennacherib king of assyria came up against all the defenc citi of
judah, and took them.

36:2 and the king of assyria sent rabshakeh from lachish to jerusalem
unto king hezekiah with a great army. and he stood by the conduit of
th upper pool in the highway of the fuller' field.

36:3 then came forth unto him eliakim, hilkiah' son, which wa over
th house, and shebna the scribe, and joah, asaph' son, the recorder.

36:4 and rabshakeh said unto them, say ye now to hezekiah, thu saith
th great king, the king of assyria, what confid is thi wherein
th trustest?  36:5 I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words)
i have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that
thou rebellest against me?  36:6 lo, thou trustest in the staff of
thi broken reed, on egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his
hand, and pierc it: so is pharaoh king of egypt to all that trust in
him.

36:7 but if thou say to me, We trust in the lord our god: is it not
he, whose high place and whose altar hezekiah hath taken away, and
said to judah and to jerusalem, Ye shall worship befor thi altar?
36:8 now therefor give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of
assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be abl on
thi part to set rider upon them.

36:9 how then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least
of my master' servants, and put thi trust on egypt for chariot and
for horsemen?  36:10 and am I now come up without the lord against
thi land to destroy it? the lord said unto me, Go up against this
land, and destroy it.

36:11 then said eliakim and shebna and joah unto rabshakeh, speak, i
pray thee, unto thi servant in the syrian language; for we understand
it: and speak not to us in the jews' language, in the ear of the
peopl that are on the wall.

36:12 but rabshakeh said, hath my master sent me to thi master and to
the to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit
upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own
piss with you?  36:13 then rabshakeh stood, and cri with a loud
voic in the jews' language, and said, hear ye the word of the great
king, the king of assyria.

36:14 thu saith the king, let not hezekiah deceiv you: for he shall
not be abl to deliv you.

36:15 neither let hezekiah make you trust in the lord, saying, the
lord will sure deliv us: thi citi shall not be deliv into the
hand of the king of assyria.

36:16 hearken not to hezekiah: for thu saith the king of assyria,
mak an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye
everi one of hi vine, and everi one of hi fig tree, and drink ye
everi one the water of hi own cistern; 36:17 until I come and take
y away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land
of bread and vineyards.

36:18 bewar lest hezekiah persuad you, saying, the lord will deliver
us.

hath ani of the god of the nation deliv hi land out of the hand
of the king of assyria?  36:19 where are the god of hamath and
arphad? where are the god of sepharvaim? and have they delivered
samaria out of my hand?  36:20 who are they among all the god of
thes lands, that have deliv their land out of my hand, that the
lord should deliv jerusalem out of my hand?  36:21 but they held
their peace, and answer him not a word: for the king' commandment
was, saying, answer him not.

36:22 then came eliakim, the son of hilkiah, that wa over the
household, and shebna the scribe, and joah, the son of asaph, the
recorder, to hezekiah with their cloth rent, and told him the words
of rabshakeh.

37:1 and it came to pass, when king hezekiah heard it, that he rent
hi clothes, and cover himself with sackcloth, and went into the
hous of the lord.

37:2 and he sent eliakim, who wa over the household, and shebna the
scribe, and the elder of the priest cover with sackcloth, unto
isaiah the prophet the son of amoz.

37:3 and they said unto him, thu saith hezekiah, thi day is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to
th birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

37:4 It may be the lord thi god will hear the word of rabshakeh, whom
th king of assyria hi master hath sent to reproach the live god,
and will reprov the word which the lord thi god hath heard:
wherefor lift up thi prayer for the remnant that is left.

37:5 So the servant of king hezekiah came to isaiah.

37:6 and isaiah said unto them, thu shall ye say unto your master,
thu saith the lord, Be not afraid of the word that thou hast heard,
wherewith the servant of the king of assyria have blasphem me.

37:7 behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour,
and return to hi own land; and I will caus him to fall by the sword
in hi own land.

37:8 So rabshakeh returned, and found the king of assyria warring
against libnah: for he had heard that he wa depart from lachish.

37:9 and he heard say concern tirhakah king of ethiopia, He is come
forth to make war with thee. and when he heard it, he sent messengers
to hezekiah, saying, 37:10 thu shall ye speak to hezekiah king of
judah, saying, let not thi god, in whom thou trustest, deceiv thee,
saying, jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
assyria.

37:11 behold, thou hast heard what the king of assyria have done to
al land by destroy them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?
37:12 have the god of the nation deliv them which my fathers
hav destroyed, as gozan, and haran, and rezeph, and the children of
eden which were in telassar?  37:13 where is the king of hamath, and
th king of arphad, and the king of the citi of sepharvaim, hena, and
ivah?  37:14 and hezekiah receiv the letter from the hand of the
messengers, and read it: and hezekiah went up unto the hous of the
lord, and spread it befor the lord.

37:15 and hezekiah pray unto the lord, saying, 37:16 O lord of
hosts, god of israel, that dwellest between the cherubims, thou art
th god, even thou alone, of all the kingdom of the earth: thou hast
mad heaven and earth.

37:17 inclin thine ear, O lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O lord,
and see: and hear all the word of sennacherib, which hath sent to
reproach the live god.

37:18 Of a truth, lord, the king of assyria have laid wast all the
nations, and their countries, 37:19 and have cast their god into the
fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men' hands, wood and
stone: therefor they have destroy them.

37:20 now therefore, O lord our god, save us from hi hand, that all
th kingdom of the earth may know that thou art the lord, even thou
only.

37:21 then isaiah the son of amoz sent unto hezekiah, saying, thus
saith the lord god of israel, wherea thou hast pray to me against
sennacherib king of assyria: 37:22 thi is the word which the lord
hath spoken concern him; the virgin, the daughter of zion, hath
despis thee, and laugh thee to scorn; the daughter of jerusalem
hath shaken her head at thee.

37:23 whom hast thou reproach and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalt thi voice, and lift up thine eye on high? even against
th holi one of israel.

37:24 By thi servant hast thou reproach the lord, and hast said, by
th multitud of my chariot am I come up to the height of the
mountains, to the side of lebanon; and I will cut down the tall
cedar thereof, and the choic fir tree thereof: and I will enter
into the height of hi border, and the forest of hi carmel.

37:25 I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet
hav I dri up all the river of the besieg places.

37:26 hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient
times, that I have form it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
shouldest be to lay wast defenc citi into ruinou heaps.

37:27 therefor their inhabit were of small power, they were
dismay and confounded: they were as the grass of the field, and as
th green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted
befor it be grown up.

37:28 but I know thi abode, and thi go out, and thi come in, and
thi rage against me.

37:29 becaus thi rage against me, and thi tumult, is come up into
min ears, therefor will I put my hook in thi nose, and my bridl in
thi lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

37:30 and thi shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat thi year such
a groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the
same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and
eat the fruit thereof.

37:31 and the remnant that is escap of the hous of judah shall
again take root downward, and bear fruit upward: 37:32 for out of
jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escap out of mount
zion: the zeal of the lord of host shall do this.

37:33 therefor thu saith the lord concern the king of assyria, he
shal not come into thi city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
befor it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.

37:34 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall
not come into thi city, saith the lord.

37:35 for I will defend thi citi to save it for mine own sake, and
for my servant david' sake.

37:36 then the angel of the lord went forth, and smote in the camp of
th assyrian a hundr and fourscor and five thousand: and when they
aros earli in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

37:37 So sennacherib king of assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at nineveh.

37:38 and it came to pass, as he wa worship in the hous of
nisroch hi god, that adrammelech and sharez hi son smote him with
th sword; and they escap into the land of armenia: and esarhaddon
hi son reign in hi stead.

38:1 In those day wa hezekiah sick unto death. and isaiah the
prophet the son of amoz came unto him, and said unto him, thu saith
th lord, set thine hous in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

38:2 then hezekiah turn hi face toward the wall, and pray unto
th lord, 38:3 and said, rememb now, O lord, I beseech thee, how i
hav walk befor thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
don that which is good in thi sight. and hezekiah wept sore.

38:4 then came the word of the lord to isaiah, saying, 38:5 go, and
say to hezekiah, thu saith the lord, the god of david thi father, i
hav heard thi prayer, I have seen thi tears: behold, I will add unto
thi day fifteen years.

38:6 and I will deliv thee and thi citi out of the hand of the king
of assyria: and I will defend thi city.

38:7 and thi shall be a sign unto thee from the lord, that the lord
wil do thi thing that he hath spoken; 38:8 behold, I will bring
again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of
ahaz, ten degre backward. So the sun return ten degrees, by which
degre it wa gone down.

38:9 the write of hezekiah king of judah, when he had been sick, and
wa recov of hi sickness: 38:10 I said in the cut off of my
days, I shall go to the gate of the grave: I am depriv of the
residu of my years.

38:11 I said, I shall not see the lord, even the lord, in the land of
th living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabit of the
world.

38:12 mine age is departed, and is remov from me as a shepherd's
tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with
pin sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

38:13 I reckon till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all
mi bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

38:14 like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a
dove: mine eye fail with look upward: O lord, I am oppressed;
undertak for me.

38:15 what shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath
don it: I shall go softli all my year in the bitter of my soul.

38:16 O lord, by these thing men live, and in all these thing is the
lif of my spirit: so wilt thou recov me, and make me to live.

38:17 behold, for peac I had great bitterness: but thou hast in love
to my soul deliv it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast
al my sin behind thi back.

38:18 for the grave cannot prais thee, death can not celebr thee:
they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thi truth.

38:19 the living, the living, he shall prais thee, as I do thi day:
th father to the children shall make known thi truth.

38:20 the lord wa readi to save me: therefor we will sing my songs
to the string instrument all the day of our life in the hous of
th lord.

38:21 for isaiah had said, let them take a lump of figs, and lay it
for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.

38:22 hezekiah also had said, what is the sign that I shall go up to
th hous of the lord?  39:1 At that time merodachbaladan, the son of
baladan, king of babylon, sent letter and a present to hezekiah: for
h had heard that he had been sick, and wa recovered.

39:2 and hezekiah wa glad of them, and shew them the hous of his
preci things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the
preci ointment, and all the hous of hi armour, and all that was
found in hi treasures: there wa noth in hi house, nor in all his
dominion, that hezekiah shew them not.

39:3 then came isaiah the prophet unto king hezekiah, and said unto
him, what said these men? and from whenc came they unto thee? and
hezekiah said, they are come from a far countri unto me, even from
babylon.

39:4 then said he, what have they seen in thine house? and hezekiah
answered, all that is in mine hous have they seen: there is nothing
among my treasur that I have not shew them.

39:5 then said isaiah to hezekiah, hear the word of the lord of hosts:
39:6 behold, the day come, that all that is in thine house, and that
which thi father have laid up in store until thi day, shall be
carri to babylon: noth shall be left, saith the lord.

39:7 and of thi son that shall issu from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuch in the palace
of the king of babylon.

39:8 then said hezekiah to isaiah, good is the word of the lord which
thou hast spoken. He said moreover, for there shall be peac and truth
in my days.

40:1 comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your god.

40:2 speak ye comfort to jerusalem, and cri unto her, that her
warfar is accomplished, that her iniqu is pardoned: for she hath
receiv of the lord' hand doubl for all her sins.

40:3 the voic of him that crieth in the wilderness, prepar ye the
way of the lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our god.

40:4 everi valley shall be exalted, and everi mountain and hill shall
b made low: and the crook shall be made straight, and the rough
plac plain: 40:5 and the glori of the lord shall be revealed, and
al flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the lord hath spoken
it.

40:6 the voic said, cry. and he said, what shall I cry? all flesh is
grass, and all the goodli thereof is as the flower of the field:
40:7 the grass withereth, the flower fadeth: becaus the spirit of the
lord bloweth upon it: sure the peopl is grass.

40:8 the grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our god
shal stand for ever.

40:9 O zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain; O jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thi voice
with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the citi of
judah, behold your god!  40:10 behold, the lord god will come with
strong hand, and hi arm shall rule for him: behold, hi reward is
with him, and hi work befor him.

40:11 He shall feed hi flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the
lamb with hi arm, and carri them in hi bosom, and shall gentli lead
thos that are with young.

40:12 who hath measur the water in the hollow of hi hand, and
met out heaven with the span, and comprehend the dust of the earth
in a measure, and weigh the mountain in scales, and the hill in a
balance?  40:13 who hath direct the spirit of the lord, or be his
counsellor hath taught him?  40:14 with whom took he counsel, and who
instruct him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him
knowledge, and shew to him the way of understanding?  40:15 behold,
th nation are as a drop of a bucket, and are count as the small
dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isl as a veri little
thing.

40:16 and lebanon is not suffici to burn, nor the beast thereof
suffici for a burnt offering.

40:17 all nation befor him are as nothing; and they are count to
him less than nothing, and vanity.

40:18 To whom then will ye liken god? or what like will ye compare
unto him?  40:19 the workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith
spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

40:20 He that is so impoverish that he hath no oblat chooseth a
tre that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cun workman to
prepar a graven image, that shall not be moved.

40:21 have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you
from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundat of the
earth?  40:22 It is he that sitteth upon the circl of the earth, and
th inhabit thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the
heaven as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:
40:23 that bringeth the princ to nothing; he maketh the judg of
th earth as vanity.

40:24 yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown:
yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also
blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take
them away as stubble.

40:25 To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the
holi one.

40:26 lift up your eye on high, and behold who hath creat these
things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by
nam by the great of hi might, for that he is strong in power;
not one faileth.

40:27 whi sayest thou, O jacob, and speakest, O israel, My way is hid
from the lord, and my judgment is pass over from my god?  40:28 hast
thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlast god, the
lord, the creator of the end of the earth, fainteth not, neither is
weary? there is no search of hi understanding.

40:29 He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
increaseth strength.

40:30 even the youth shall faint and be weary, and the young men
shal utterli fall: 40:31 but they that wait upon the lord shall renew
their strength; they shall mount up with wing as eagles; they shall
run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.

41:1 keep silenc befor me, O islands; and let the peopl renew their
strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near
togeth to judgment.

41:2 who rais up the righteou man from the east, call him to his
foot, gave the nation befor him, and made him rule over kings? he
gav them as the dust to hi sword, and as driven stubbl to hi bow.

41:3 He pursu them, and pass safely; even by the way that he had
not gone with hi feet.

41:4 who hath wrought and done it, call the gener from the
beginning? I the lord, the first, and with the last; I am he.

41:5 the isl saw it, and feared; the end of the earth were afraid,
drew near, and came.

41:6 they help everi one hi neighbour; and everi one said to his
brother, Be of good courage.

41:7 So the carpent encourag the goldsmith, and he that smootheth
with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is readi for the
sodering: and he fasten it with nails, that it should not be moved.

41:8 but thou, israel, art my servant, jacob whom I have chosen, the
se of abraham my friend.

41:9 thou whom I have taken from the end of the earth, and called
the from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my
servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

41:10 fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy
god: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
the with the right hand of my righteousness.

41:11 behold, all they that were incens against thee shall be
asham and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive
with thee shall perish.

41:12 thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that
contend with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing,
and as a thing of nought.

41:13 for I the lord thi god will hold thi right hand, say unto
thee, fear not; I will help thee.

41:14 fear not, thou worm jacob, and ye men of israel; I will help
thee, saith the lord, and thi redeemer, the holi one of israel.

41:15 behold, I will make thee a new sharp thresh instrument having
teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt
mak the hill as chaff.

41:16 thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carri them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoic in the lord, and
shalt glori in the holi one of israel.

41:17 when the poor and needi seek water, and there is none, and their
tongu faileth for thirst, I the lord will hear them, I the god of
israel will not forsak them.

41:18 I will open river in high places, and fountain in the midst of
th valleys: I will make the wilder a pool of water, and the dry
land spring of water.

41:19 I will plant in the wilder the cedar, the shittah tree, and
th myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree,
and the pine, and the box tree together: 41:20 that they may see, and
know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the lord
hath done this, and the holi one of israel hath creat it.

41:21 produc your cause, saith the lord; bring forth your strong
reasons, saith the king of jacob.

41:22 let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let
them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consid them,
and know the latter end of them; or declar us thing for to come.

41:23 shew the thing that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed,
and behold it together.

41:24 behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an
abomin is he that chooseth you.

41:25 I have rais up one from the north, and he shall come: from the
ris of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon
princ as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.

41:26 who hath declar from the beginning, that we may know? and
beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that
sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that
heareth your words.

41:27 the first shall say to zion, behold, behold them: and I will
giv to jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.

41:28 for I beheld, and there wa no man; even among them, and there
wa no counsellor, that, when I ask of them, could answer a word.

41:29 behold, they are all vanity; their work are nothing: their
molten imag are wind and confusion.

42:1 behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth
judg to the gentiles.

42:2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor caus hi voic to be heard in
th street.

42:3 A bruis reed shall he not break, and the smoke flax shall he
not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

42:4 He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment
in the earth: and the isl shall wait for hi law.

42:5 thu saith god the lord, he that creat the heavens, and
stretch them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which
cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the peopl upon it, and
spirit to them that walk therein: 42:6 I the lord have call thee in
righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give
the for a coven of the people, for a light of the gentiles; 42:7
to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prison from the prison,
and them that sit in dark out of the prison house.

42:8 I am the lord: that is my name: and my glori will I not give to
another, neither my prais to graven images.

42:9 behold, the former thing are come to pass, and new thing do i
declare: befor they spring forth I tell you of them.

42:10 sing unto the lord a new song, and hi prais from the end of
th earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the
isles, and the inhabit thereof.

42:11 let the wilder and the citi thereof lift up their voice,
th villag that kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabit of the rock
sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains.

42:12 let them give glori unto the lord, and declar hi prais in the
islands.

42:13 the lord shall go forth as a mighti man, he shall stir up
jealousi like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail
against hi enemies.

42:14 I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and
refrain myself: now will I cri like a travail woman; I will
destroy and devour at once.

42:15 I will make wast mountain and hills, and dri up all their
herbs; and I will make the river islands, and I will dri up the
pools.

42:16 and I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will
lead them in path that they have not known: I will make darkness
light befor them, and crook thing straight. these thing will I do
unto them, and not forsak them.

42:17 they shall be turn back, they shall be greatli ashamed, that
trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our
gods.

42:18 hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

42:19 who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messeng that i
sent?  who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the lord's
servant?  42:20 see mani things, but thou observest not; opening
th ears, but he heareth not.

42:21 the lord is well pleas for hi righteousness' sake; he will
magnifi the law, and make it honourable.

42:22 but thi is a peopl rob and spoiled; they are all of them
snar in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a
prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, restore.

42:23 who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear
for the time to come?  42:24 who gave jacob for a spoil, and israel to
th robbers? did not the lord, he against whom we have sinned? for
they would not walk in hi ways, neither were they obedi unto his
law.

42:25 therefor he hath pour upon him the furi of hi anger, and the
strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he
knew not; and it burn him, yet he laid it not to heart.

43:1 but now thu saith the lord that creat thee, O jacob, and he
that form thee, O israel, fear not: for I have redeem thee, I have
cal thee by thi name; thou art mine.

43:2 when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest
through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame
kindl upon thee.

43:3 for I am the lord thi god, the holi one of israel, thi saviour: i
gav egypt for thi ransom, ethiopia and seba for thee.

43:4 sinc thou wast preciou in my sight, thou hast been honourable,
and I have love thee: therefor will I give men for thee, and people
for thi life.

43:5 fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thi seed from the
east, and gather thee from the west; 43:6 I will say to the north,
giv up; and to the south, keep not back: bring my son from far, and
mi daughter from the end of the earth; 43:7 even everi one that is
cal by my name: for I have creat him for my glory, I have formed
him; yea, I have made him.

43:8 bring forth the blind peopl that have eyes, and the deaf that
hav ears.

43:9 let all the nation be gather together, and let the peopl be
assembled: who among them can declar this, and shew us former things?
let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or
let them hear, and say, It is truth.

43:10 Ye are my witnesses, saith the lord, and my servant whom I have
chosen: that ye may know and believ me, and understand that I am he:
befor me there wa no god formed, neither shall there be after me.

43:11 I, even I, am the lord; and besid me there is no saviour.

43:12 I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there
wa no strang god among you: therefor ye are my witnesses, saith the
lord, that I am god.

43:13 yea, befor the day wa I am he; and there is none that can
deliv out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?  43:14 thus
saith the lord, your redeemer, the holi one of israel; for your sake i
hav sent to babylon, and have brought down all their nobles, and the
chaldeans, whose cri is in the ships.

43:15 I am the lord, your holi one, the creator of israel, your king.

43:16 thu saith the lord, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path
in the mighti waters; 43:17 which bringeth forth the chariot and
horse, the armi and the power; they shall lie down together, they
shal not rise: they are extinct, they are quench as tow.

43:18 rememb ye not the former things, neither consid the things
of old.

43:19 behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall
y not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers
in the desert.

43:20 the beast of the field shall honour me, the dragon and the
owls: becaus I give water in the wilderness, and river in the
desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

43:21 thi peopl have I form for myself; they shall shew forth my
praise.

43:22 but thou hast not call upon me, O jacob; but thou hast been
weari of me, O israel.

43:23 thou hast not brought me the small cattl of thi burnt
offerings; neither hast thou honour me with thi sacrifices. I have
not caus thee to serv with an offering, nor weari thee with
incense.

43:24 thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou
fil me with the fat of thi sacrifices: but thou hast made me to
serv with thi sins, thou hast weari me with thine iniquities.

43:25 I, even I, am he that blotteth out thi transgress for mine
own sake, and will not rememb thi sins.

43:26 put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declar thou, that
thou mayest be justified.

43:27 thi first father hath sinned, and thi teacher have transgressed
against me.

43:28 therefor I have profan the princ of the sanctuary, and have
given jacob to the curse, and israel to reproaches.

44:1 yet now hear, O jacob my servant; and israel, whom I have chosen:
44:2 thu saith the lord that made thee, and form thee from the
womb, which will help thee; fear not, O jacob, my servant; and thou,
jesurun, whom I have chosen.

44:3 for I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and flood upon
th dri ground: I will pour my spirit upon thi seed, and my blessing
upon thine offspring: 44:4 and they shall spring up as among the
grass, as willow by the water courses.

44:5 one shall say, I am the lord's; and anoth shall call himself by
th name of jacob; and anoth shall subscrib with hi hand unto the
lord, and surnam himself by the name of israel.

44:6 thu saith the lord the king of israel, and hi redeem the lord
of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and besid me there is no
god.

44:7 and who, as I, shall call, and shall declar it, and set it in
ord for me, sinc I appoint the ancient people? and the things
that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.

44:8 fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that
time, and have declar it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a god
besid me? yea, there is no god; I know not any.

44:9 they that make a graven imag are all of them vanity; and their
delect thing shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses;
they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

44:10 who hath form a god, or molten a graven imag that is
profit for nothing?  44:11 behold, all hi fellow shall be
ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered
together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be
asham together.

44:12 the smith with the tong both worketh in the coals, and
fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his
arms: yea, he is hungry, and hi strength faileth: he drinketh no
water, and is faint.

44:13 the carpent stretcheth out hi rule; he marketh it out with a
line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the
compass, and maketh it after the figur of a man, accord to the
beauti of a man; that it may remain in the house.

44:14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak,
which he strengtheneth for himself among the tree of the forest: he
planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.

44:15 then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof,
and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he
maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and
falleth down thereto.

44:16 He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth
flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself,
and saith, aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire: 44:17 and the residue
thereof he maketh a god, even hi graven image: he falleth down unto
it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, deliv me;
for thou art my god.

44:18 they have not known nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes,
that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand.

44:19 and none considereth in hi heart, neither is there knowledge
nor understand to say, I have burn part of it in the fire; yea,
also I have bake bread upon the coal thereof; I have roast flesh,
and eaten it: and shall I make the residu thereof an abomination?
shal I fall down to the stock of a tree?  44:20 He feedeth on ashes:
a deceiv heart hath turn him aside, that he cannot deliv his
soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?  44:21 remember
these, O jacob and israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed
thee; thou art my servant: O israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of
me.

44:22 I have blot out, as a thick cloud, thi transgressions, and,
a a cloud, thi sins: return unto me; for I have redeem thee.

44:23 sing, O ye heavens; for the lord hath done it: shout, ye lower
part of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest,
and everi tree therein: for the lord hath redeem jacob, and
glorifi himself in israel.

44:24 thu saith the lord, thi redeemer, and he that form thee from
th womb, I am the lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth
th heaven alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself; 44:25
that frustrateth the token of the liars, and maketh divin mad;
that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledg foolish;
44:26 that confirmeth the word of hi servant, and performeth the
counsel of hi messengers; that saith to jerusalem, thou shalt be
inhabited; and to the citi of judah, Ye shall be built, and I will
rais up the decay place thereof: 44:27 that saith to the deep, be
dry, and I will dri up thi rivers: 44:28 that saith of cyrus, He is my
shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even say to jerusalem,
th shalt be built; and to the temple, thi foundat shall be laid.

45:1 thu saith the lord to hi anointed, to cyrus, whose right hand i
hav holden, to subdu nation befor him; and I will loos the loins
of kings, to open befor him the two leav gates; and the gate shall
not be shut; 45:2 I will go befor thee, and make the crook places
straight: I will break in piec the gate of brass, and cut in sunder
th bar of iron: 45:3 and I will give thee the treasur of darkness,
and hidden rich of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the
lord, which call thee by thi name, am the god of israel.

45:4 for jacob my servant' sake, and israel mine elect, I have even
cal thee by thi name: I have surnam thee, though thou hast not
known me.

45:5 I am the lord, and there is none else, there is no god besid me:
i gird thee, though thou hast not known me: 45:6 that they may know
from the rise of the sun, and from the west, that there is none
besid me. I am the lord, and there is none else.

45:7 I form the light, and creat darkness: I make peace, and create
evil: I the lord do all these things.

45:8 drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the sky pour down
righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation,
and let righteous spring up together; I the lord have creat it.

45:9 woe unto him that striveth with hi maker! let the potsherd
str with the potsherd of the earth. shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, what makest thou? or thi work, He hath no hands?  45:10
woe unto him that saith unto hi father, what begettest thou? or to
th woman, what hast thou brought forth?  45:11 thu saith the lord,
th holi one of israel, and hi maker, ask me of thing to come
concern my sons, and concern the work of my hand command ye me.

45:12 I have made the earth, and creat man upon it: I, even my
hands, have stretch out the heavens, and all their host have i
commanded.

45:13 I have rais him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his
ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for
pric nor reward, saith the lord of hosts.

45:14 thu saith the lord, the labour of egypt, and merchandis of
ethiopia and of the sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto
thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains
they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall
mak supplic unto thee, saying, sure god is in thee; and there
i none else, there is no god.

45:15 verili thou art a god that hidest thyself, O god of israel, the
saviour.

45:16 they shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they
shal go to confus togeth that are maker of idols.

45:17 but israel shall be save in the lord with an everlasting
salvation: ye shall not be asham nor confound world without end.

45:18 for thu saith the lord that creat the heavens; god himself
that form the earth and made it; he hath establish it, he created
it not in vain, he form it to be inhabited: I am the lord; and there
i none else.

45:19 I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: i
said not unto the seed of jacob, seek ye me in vain: I the lord speak
righteousness, I declar thing that are right.

45:20 assembl yourselv and come; draw near together, ye that are
escap of the nations: they have no knowledg that set up the wood of
their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.

45:21 tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel
together: who hath declar thi from ancient time? who hath told it
from that time?  have not I the lord? and there is no god els beside
me; a just god and a saviour; there is none besid me.

45:22 look unto me, and be ye saved, all the end of the earth: for i
am god, and there is none else.

45:23 I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me everi knee shall
bow, everi tongu shall swear.

45:24 surely, shall one say, in the lord have I righteous and
strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed
against him shall be ashamed.

45:25 In the lord shall all the seed of israel be justified, and shall
glory.

46:1 bel boweth down, nebo stoopeth, their idol were upon the beasts,
and upon the cattle: your carriag were heavi loaden; they are a
burden to the weari beast.

46:2 they stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliv the
burden, but themselv are gone into captivity.

46:3 hearken unto me, O hous of jacob, and all the remnant of the
hous of israel, which are born by me from the belly, which are
carri from the womb: 46:4 and even to your old age I am he; and even
to hoar hair will I carri you: I have made, and I will bear; even i
wil carry, and will deliv you.

46:5 To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compar me, that
w may be like?  46:6 they lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh
silv in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god:
they fall down, yea, they worship.

46:7 they bear him upon the shoulder, they carri him, and set him in
hi place, and he standeth; from hi place shall he not remove: yea,
on shall cri unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his
trouble.

46:8 rememb this, and shew yourselv men: bring it again to mind, o
y transgressors.

46:9 rememb the former thing of old: for I am god, and there is
non else; I am god, and there is none like me, 46:10 declar the
end from the beginning, and from ancient time the thing that are not
yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure: 46:11 call a raven bird from the east, the man that
executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will
also bring it to pass; I have purpos it, I will also do it.

46:12 hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from
righteousness: 46:13 I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be
far off, and my salvat shall not tarry: and I will place salvation
in zion for israel my glory.

47:1 come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of babylon, sit
on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the chaldeans: for
thou shalt no more be call tender and delicate.

47:2 take the millstones, and grind meal: uncov thi locks, make bare
th leg, uncov the thigh, pass over the rivers.

47:3 thi naked shall be uncovered, yea, thi shame shall be seen: i
wil take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.

47:4 As for our redeemer, the lord of host is hi name, the holi one
of israel.

47:5 sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the
chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, the ladi of kingdoms.

47:6 I wa wroth with my people, I have pollut mine inheritance, and
given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the
anci hast thou veri heavili laid thi yoke.

47:7 and thou saidst, I shall be a ladi for ever: so that thou didst
not lay these thing to thi heart, neither didst rememb the latter
end of it.

47:8 therefor hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that
dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else
besid me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss
of children: 47:9 but these two thing shall come to thee in a moment
in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon
the in their perfect for the multitud of thi sorceries, and for
th great abund of thine enchantments.

47:10 for thou hast trust in thi wickedness: thou hast said, none
seeth me. thi wisdom and thi knowledge, it hath pervert thee; and
thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none els besid me.

47:11 therefor shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from
whenc it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be
abl to put it off: and desol shall come upon thee suddenly,
which thou shalt not know.

47:12 stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitud of thy
sorceries, wherein thou hast labour from thi youth; if so be thou
shalt be abl to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.

47:13 thou art weari in the multitud of thi counsels. let now the
astrologers, the stargazers, the monthli prognosticators, stand up,
and save thee from these thing that shall come upon thee.

47:14 behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they
shal not deliv themselv from the power of the flame: there shall
not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit befor it.

47:15 thu shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even
thi merchants, from thi youth: they shall wander everi one to his
quarter; none shall save thee.

48:1 hear ye this, O hous of jacob, which are call by the name of
israel, and are come forth out of the water of judah, which swear by
th name of the lord, and make mention of the god of israel, but not
in truth, nor in righteousness.

48:2 for they call themselv of the holi city, and stay themselves
upon the god of israel; the lord of host is hi name.

48:3 I have declar the former thing from the beginning; and they
went forth out of my mouth, and I shew them; I did them suddenly,
and they came to pass.

48:4 becaus I knew that thou art obstinate, and thi neck is an iron
sinew, and thi brow brass; 48:5 I have even from the beginning
declar it to thee; befor it came to pass I shew it thee: lest
thou shouldest say, mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and
mi molten image, hath command them.

48:6 thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declar it? I have
shew thee new thing from thi time, even hidden things, and thou
didst not know them.

48:7 they are creat now, and not from the beginning; even befor the
day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, behold, i
knew them.

48:8 yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that
tim that thine ear wa not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal
veri treacherously, and wast call a transgressor from the womb.

48:9 for my name' sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise
wil I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.

48:10 behold, I have refin thee, but not with silver; I have chosen
the in the furnac of affliction.

48:11 for mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how
should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glori unto another.

48:12 hearken unto me, O jacob and israel, my called; I am he; I am
th first, I also am the last.

48:13 mine hand also hath laid the foundat of the earth, and my
right hand hath span the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand
up together.

48:14 all ye, assembl yourselves, and hear; which among them hath
declar these things? the lord hath love him: he will do his
pleasur on babylon, and hi arm shall be on the chaldeans.

48:15 I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have call him: I have brought
him, and he shall make hi way prosperous.

48:16 come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret
from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the
lord god, and hi spirit, hath sent me.

48:17 thu saith the lord, thi redeemer, the holi one of israel; I am
th lord thi god which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by
th way that thou shouldest go.

48:18 O that thou hadst hearken to my commandments! then had thy
peac been as a river, and thi righteous as the wave of the sea:
48:19 thi seed also had been as the sand, and the offspr of thy
bowel like the gravel thereof; hi name should not have been cut off
nor destroy from befor me.

48:20 Go ye forth of babylon, flee ye from the chaldeans, with a voice
of sing declar ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the
earth; say ye, the lord hath redeem hi servant jacob.

48:21 and they thirst not when he led them through the deserts: he
caus the water to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock
also, and the water gush out.

48:22 there is no peace, saith the lord, unto the wicked.

49:1 listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; the
lord hath call me from the womb; from the bowel of my mother hath
h made mention of my name.

49:2 and he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of
hi hand hath he hid me, and made me a polish shaft; in hi quiver
hath he hid me; 49:3 and said unto me, thou art my servant, O israel,
in whom I will be glorified.

49:4 then I said, I have labour in vain, I have spent my strength
for nought, and in vain: yet sure my judgment is with the lord, and
mi work with my god.

49:5 and now, saith the lord that form me from the womb to be his
servant, to bring jacob again to him, though israel be not gathered,
yet shall I be gloriou in the eye of the lord, and my god shall be
mi strength.

49:6 and he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my
serv to rais up the tribe of jacob, and to restor the preserved
of israel: I will also give thee for a light to the gentiles, that
thou mayest be my salvat unto the end of the earth.

49:7 thu saith the lord, the redeem of israel, and hi holi one, to
him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant
of rulers, king shall see and arise, princ also shall worship,
becaus of the lord that is faithful, and the holi one of israel, and
h shall choos thee.

49:8 thu saith the lord, In an accept time have I heard thee, and
in a day of salvat have I help thee: and I will preserv thee,
and give thee for a coven of the people, to establish the earth, to
caus to inherit the desol heritages; 49:9 that thou mayest say to
th prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, shew
yourselves. they shall feed in the ways, and their pastur shall be
in all high places.

49:10 they shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun
smit them: for he that hath merci on them shall lead them, even by
th spring of water shall he guid them.

49:11 and I will make all my mountain a way, and my highway shall be
exalted.

49:12 behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north
and from the west; and these from the land of sinim.

49:13 sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into
singing, O mountains: for the lord hath comfort hi people, and will
hav merci upon hi afflicted.

49:14 but zion said, the lord hath forsaken me, and my lord hath
forgotten me.

49:15 can a woman forget her suck child, that she should not have
compass on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will i
not forget thee.

49:16 behold, I have graven thee upon the palm of my hands; thi walls
ar continu befor me.

49:17 thi children shall make haste; thi destroy and they that made
the wast shall go forth of thee.

49:18 lift up thine eye round about, and behold: all these gather
themselv together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the lord, thou
shalt sure cloth thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind
them on thee, as a bride doeth.

49:19 for thi wast and thi desol places, and the land of thy
destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the
inhabitants, and they that swallow thee up shall be far away.

49:20 the children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the
other, shall say again in thine ears, the place is too strait for me:
giv place to me that I may dwell.

49:21 then shalt thou say in thine heart, who hath begotten me these,
se I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and
remov to and fro? and who hath brought up these? behold, I wa left
alone; these, where had they been?  49:22 thu saith the lord god,
behold, I will lift up mine hand to the gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people: and they shall bring thi son in their arms,
and thi daughter shall be carri upon their shoulders.

49:23 and king shall be thi nurs fathers, and their queen thy
nurs mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward
th earth, and lick up the dust of thi feet; and thou shalt know that
i am the lord: for they shall not be asham that wait for me.

49:24 shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the law captive
delivered?  49:25 but thu saith the lord, even the captiv of the
mighti shall be taken away, and the prey of the terribl shall be
delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and
i will save thi children.

49:26 and I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and
they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and
al flesh shall know that I the lord am thi saviour and thi redeemer,
th mighti one of jacob.

50:1 thu saith the lord, where is the bill of your mother's
divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditor is it to
whom I have sold you?  behold, for your iniqu have ye sold
yourselves, and for your transgress is your mother put away.

50:2 wherefore, when I came, wa there no man? when I called, was
ther none to answer? Is my hand shorten at all, that it cannot
redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuk I dri up
th sea, I make the river a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because
ther is no water, and dieth for thirst.

50:3 I cloth the heaven with blackness, and I make sackcloth their
covering.

50:4 the lord god hath given me the tongu of the learned, that i
should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he
wakeneth morn by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the
learned.

50:5 the lord god hath open mine ear, and I wa not rebellious,
neith turn away back.

50:6 I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheek to them that plucked
off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

50:7 for the lord god will help me; therefor shall I not be
confounded: therefor have I set my face like a flint, and I know that
i shall not be ashamed.

50:8 He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us
stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.

50:9 behold, the lord god will help me; who is he that shall condemn
me?  lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them
up.

50:10 who is among you that feareth the lord, that obeyeth the voice
of hi servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him
trust in the name of the lord, and stay upon hi god.

50:11 behold, all ye that kindl a fire, that compass yourselv about
with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the spark that ye
hav kindled. thi shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in
sorrow.

51:1 hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek
th lord: look unto the rock whenc ye are hewn, and to the hole of
th pit whenc ye are digged.

51:2 look unto abraham your father, and unto sarah that bare you: for
i call him alone, and bless him, and increas him.

51:3 for the lord shall comfort zion: he will comfort all her waste
places; and he will make her wilder like eden, and her desert like
th garden of the lord; joy and glad shall be found therein,
thanksgiving, and the voic of melody.

51:4 hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation:
for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest
for a light of the people.

51:5 My righteous is near; my salvat is gone forth, and mine
arm shall judg the people; the isl shall wait upon me, and on mine
arm shall they trust.

51:6 lift up your eye to the heavens, and look upon the earth
beneath: for the heaven shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth
shal wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in
lik manner: but my salvat shall be for ever, and my righteousness
shal not be abolished.

51:7 hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the peopl in whose
heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid
of their revilings.

51:8 for the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool: but my righteous shall be for ever, and my
salv from gener to generation.

51:9 awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the lord; awake, as in
th ancient days, in the gener of old. art thou not it that hath
cut rahab, and wound the dragon?  51:10 art thou not it which hath
dri the sea, the water of the great deep; that hath made the depths
of the sea a way for the ransom to pass over?  51:11 therefor the
redeem of the lord shall return, and come with sing unto zion;
and everlast joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain
glad and joy; and sorrow and mourn shall flee away.

51:12 I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou
shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man
which shall be made as grass; 51:13 and forgettest the lord thi maker,
that hath stretch forth the heavens, and laid the foundat of the
earth; and hast fear continu everi day becaus of the furi of
th oppressor, as if he were readi to destroy? and where is the fury
of the oppressor?  51:14 the captiv exil hasteneth that he may be
loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that hi bread
should fail.

51:15 but I am the lord thi god, that divid the sea, whose waves
roared: the lord of host is hi name.

51:16 and I have put my word in thi mouth, and I have cover thee in
th shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the
found of the earth, and say unto zion, thou art my people.

51:17 awake, awake, stand up, O jerusalem, which hast drunk at the
hand of the lord the cup of hi fury; thou hast drunken the dreg of
th cup of trembling, and wrung them out.

51:18 there is none to guid her among all the son whom she hath
brought forth; neither is there ani that taketh her by the hand of all
th son that she hath brought up.

51:19 these two thing are come unto thee; who shall be sorri for
thee?  desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by
whom shall I comfort thee?  51:20 thi son have fainted, they lie at
th head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of
th furi of the lord, the rebuk of thi god.

51:21 therefor hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not
with wine: 51:22 thu saith thi lord the lord, and thi god that
pleadeth the caus of hi people, behold, I have taken out of thine
hand the cup of trembling, even the dreg of the cup of my fury; thou
shalt no more drink it again: 51:23 but I will put it into the hand of
them that afflict thee; which have said to thi soul, bow down, that we
may go over: and thou hast laid thi bodi as the ground, and as the
street, to them that went over.

52:1 awake, awake; put on thi strength, O zion; put on thi beautiful
garments, O jerusalem, the holi city: for henceforth there shall no
mor come into thee the uncircumcis and the unclean.

52:2 shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O jerusalem:
loos thyself from the band of thi neck, O captiv daughter of zion.

52:3 for thu saith the lord, Ye have sold yourselv for nought; and
y shall be redeem without money.

52:4 for thu saith the lord god, My peopl went down aforetim into
egypt to sojourn there; and the assyrian oppress them without cause.

52:5 now therefore, what have I here, saith the lord, that my people
i taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl,
saith the lord; and my name continu everi day is blasphemed.

52:6 therefor my peopl shall know my name: therefor they shall know
in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is i.

52:7 how beauti upon the mountain are the feet of him that
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good
tid of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto zion, thy
god reigneth!  52:8 thi watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the
voic togeth shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when
th lord shall bring again zion.

52:9 break forth into joy, sing together, ye wast place of
jerusalem: for the lord hath comfort hi people, he hath redeemed
jerusalem.

52:10 the lord hath made bare hi holi arm in the eye of all the
nations; and all the end of the earth shall see the salvat of our
god.

52:11 depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the
vessel of the lord.

52:12 for ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the
lord will go befor you; and the god of israel will be your rereward.

52:13 behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalt and
extolled, and be veri high.

52:14 As mani were astoni at thee; hi visag wa so mar more
than ani man, and hi form more than the son of men: 52:15 So shall
h sprinkl mani nations; the king shall shut their mouth at him:
for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which
they had not heard shall they consider.

53:1 who hath believ our report? and to whom is the arm of the lord
revealed?  53:2 for he shall grow up befor him as a tender plant, and
a a root out of a dri ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and
when we shall see him, there is no beauti that we should desir him.

53:3 He is despis and reject of men; a man of sorrows, and
acquaint with grief: and we hid as it were our face from him; he
wa despised, and we esteem him not.

53:4 sure he hath born our griefs, and carri our sorrows: yet we
did esteem him stricken, smitten of god, and afflicted.

53:5 but he wa wound for our transgressions, he wa bruis for our
iniquities: the chastis of our peac wa upon him; and with his
strip we are healed.

53:6 all we like sheep have gone astray; we have turn everi one to
hi own way; and the lord hath laid on him the iniqu of us all.

53:7 He wa oppressed, and he wa afflicted, yet he open not his
mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
h shearer is dumb, so he openeth not hi mouth.

53:8 He wa taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare
hi generation? for he wa cut off out of the land of the living: for
th transgress of my peopl wa he stricken.

53:9 and he made hi grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death; becaus he had done no violence, neither wa ani deceit in his
mouth.

53:10 yet it pleas the lord to bruis him; he hath put him to grief:
when thou shalt make hi soul an offer for sin, he shall see his
seed, he shall prolong hi days, and the pleasur of the lord shall
prosp in hi hand.

53:11 He shall see of the travail of hi soul, and shall be satisfied:
bi hi knowledg shall my righteou servant justifi many; for he shall
bear their iniquities.

53:12 therefor will I divid him a portion with the great, and he
shal divid the spoil with the strong; becaus he hath pour out his
soul unto death: and he wa number with the transgressors; and he
bar the sin of many, and made intercess for the transgressors.

54:1 sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into
singing, and cri aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for
mor are the children of the desol than the children of the married
wife, saith the lord.

54:2 enlarg the place of thi tent, and let them stretch forth the
curtain of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thi cords, and
strengthen thi stakes; 54:3 for thou shalt break forth on the right
hand and on the left; and thi seed shall inherit the gentiles, and
mak the desol citi to be inhabited.

54:4 fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou
confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget
th shame of thi youth, and shalt not rememb the reproach of thy
widowhood ani more.

54:5 for thi maker is thine husband; the lord of host is hi name;
and thi redeem the holi one of israel; the god of the whole earth
shal he be called.

54:6 for the lord hath call thee as a woman forsaken and griev in
spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thi god.

54:7 for a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies
wil I gather thee.

54:8 In a littl wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with
everlast kind will I have merci on thee, saith the lord thy
redeemer.

54:9 for thi is as the water of noah unto me: for as I have sworn
that the water of noah should no more go over the earth; so have i
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuk thee.

54:10 for the mountain shall depart, and the hill be removed; but my
kind shall not depart from thee, neither shall the coven of my
peac be removed, saith the lord that hath merci on thee.

54:11 O thou afflicted, toss with tempest, and not comforted,
behold, I will lay thi stone with fair colours, and lay thy
found with sapphires.

54:12 and I will make thi window of agates, and thi gate of
carbuncles, and all thi border of pleasant stones.

54:13 and all thi children shall be taught of the lord; and great
shal be the peac of thi children.

54:14 In righteous shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far
from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it
shal not come near thee.

54:15 behold, they shall sure gather together, but not by me:
whosoev shall gather togeth against thee shall fall for thi sake.

54:16 behold, I have creat the smith that bloweth the coal in the
fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for hi work; and I have
cr the waster to destroy.

54:17 No weapon that is form against thee shall prosper; and every
tongu that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.
thi is the heritag of the servant of the lord, and their
right is of me, saith the lord.

55:1 ho, everi one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that
hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price.

55:2 wherefor do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your
labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken dilig unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in
fatness.

55:3 inclin your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall
live; and I will make an everlast coven with you, even the sure
merci of david.

55:4 behold, I have given him for a wit to the people, a leader
and command to the people.

55:5 behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and
nat that knew not thee shall run unto thee becaus of the lord thy
god, and for the holi one of israel; for he hath glorifi thee.

55:6 seek ye the lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he
i near: 55:7 let the wick forsak hi way, and the unright man
hi thoughts: and let him return unto the lord, and he will have mercy
upon him; and to our god, for he will abundantli pardon.

55:8 for my thought are not your thoughts, neither are your way my
ways, saith the lord.

55:9 for as the heaven are higher than the earth, so are my ways
high than your ways, and my thought than your thoughts.

55:10 for as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and
returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater: 55:11 So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it
shal not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which i
please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

55:12 for ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the
mountain and the hill shall break forth befor you into singing, and
al the tree of the field shall clap their hands.

55:13 instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of
th brier shall come up the myrtl tree: and it shall be to the lord
for a name, for an everlast sign that shall not be cut off.

56:1 thu saith the lord, keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my
salv is near to come, and my righteous to be revealed.

56:2 bless is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that
layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from pollut it, and
keepeth hi hand from do ani evil.

56:3 neither let the son of the stranger, that hath join himself to
th lord, speak, saying, the lord hath utterli separ me from his
people: neither let the eunuch say, behold, I am a dri tree.

56:4 for thu saith the lord unto the eunuch that keep my sabbaths,
and choos the thing that pleas me, and take hold of my covenant;
56:5 even unto them will I give in mine hous and within my wall a
plac and a name better than of son and of daughters: I will give
them an everlast name, that shall not be cut off.

56:6 also the son of the stranger, that join themselv to the lord,
to serv him, and to love the name of the lord, to be hi servants,
everi one that keepeth the sabbath from pollut it, and taketh hold
of my covenant; 56:7 even them will I bring to my holi mountain, and
mak them joy in my hous of prayer: their burnt offer and
their sacrific shall be accept upon mine altar; for mine house
shal be call an hous of prayer for all people.

56:8 the lord god, which gathereth the outcast of israel saith, yet
wil I gather other to him, besid those that are gather unto him.

56:9 all ye beast of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beast in
th forest.

56:10 hi watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lie down, love to slumber.

56:11 yea, they are greedi dog which can never have enough, and they
ar shepherd that cannot understand: they all look to their own way,
everi one for hi gain, from hi quarter.

56:12 come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves
with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as thi day, and much more
abundant.

57:1 the righteou perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and
merci men are taken away, none consid that the righteou is
taken away from the evil to come.

57:2 He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each
on walk in hi uprightness.

57:3 but draw near hither, ye son of the sorceress, the seed of the
adulter and the whore.

57:4 against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide
mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression,
a seed of falsehood.

57:5 enflam yourselv with idol under everi green tree, slaying
th children in the valley under the clift of the rocks?  57:6 among
th smooth stone of the stream is thi portion; they, they are thy
lot: even to them hast thou pour a drink offering, thou hast offered
a meat offering. should I receiv comfort in these?  57:7 upon a lofty
and high mountain hast thou set thi bed: even thither wentest thou up
to offer sacrifice.

57:8 behind the door also and the post hast thou set up thy
remembrance: for thou hast discov thyself to anoth than me, and
art gone up; thou hast enlarg thi bed, and made thee a coven with
them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it.

57:9 and thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase
thi perfumes, and didst send thi messeng far off, and didst debase
thyself even unto hell.

57:10 thou art weari in the great of thi way; yet saidst thou
not, there is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand;
therefor thou wast not grieved.

57:11 and of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast
lied, and hast not rememb me, nor laid it to thi heart? have not i
held my peac even of old, and thou fearest me not?  57:12 I will
declar thi righteousness, and thi works; for they shall not profit
thee.

57:13 when thou criest, let thi compani deliv thee; but the wind
shal carri them all away; vaniti shall take them: but he that putteth
hi trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy
mountain; 57:14 and shall say, cast ye up, cast ye up, prepar the
way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people.

57:15 for thu saith the high and lofti one that inhabiteth eternity,
whos name is holy; I dwell in the high and holi place, with him also
that is of a contrit and humbl spirit, to reviv the spirit of the
humble, and to reviv the heart of the contrit ones.

57:16 for I will not contend for ever, neither will I be alway wroth:
for the spirit should fail befor me, and the soul which I have made.

57:17 for the iniqu of hi covet wa I wroth, and smote him:
i hid me, and wa wroth, and he went on frowardli in the way of his
heart.

57:18 I have seen hi ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also,
and restor comfort unto him and to hi mourners.

57:19 I creat the fruit of the lips; peace, peac to him that is far
off, and to him that is near, saith the lord; and I will heal him.

57:20 but the wick are like the troubl sea, when it cannot rest,
whos water cast up mire and dirt.

57:21 there is no peace, saith my god, to the wicked.

58:1 cri aloud, spare not, lift up thi voic like a trumpet, and shew
mi peopl their transgression, and the hous of jacob their sins.

58:2 yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation
that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordin of their god:
they ask of me the ordin of justice; they take delight in
approach to god.

58:3 wherefor have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore
hav we afflict our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? behold, in
th day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.

58:4 behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist
of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do thi day, to make your voice
to be heard on high.

58:5 Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict
hi soul? is it to bow down hi head as a bulrush, and to spread
sackcloth and ash under him? wilt thou call thi a fast, and an
accept day to the lord?  58:6 Is not thi the fast that I have
chosen? to loos the band of wickedness, to undo the heavi burdens,
and to let the oppress go free, and that ye break everi yoke?  58:7
i it not to deal thi bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that are cast out to thi house? when thou seest the naked, that
thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?
58:8 then shall thi light break forth as the morning, and thine health
shal spring forth speedily: and thi righteous shall go before
thee; the glori of the lord shall be thi rereward.

58:9 then shalt thou call, and the lord shall answer; thou shalt cry,
and he shall say, here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee
th yoke, the put forth of the finger, and speak vanity; 58:10
and if thou draw out thi soul to the hungry, and satisfi the afflicted
soul; then shall thi light rise in obscurity, and thi dark be as
th noon day: 58:11 and the lord shall guid thee continually, and
satisfi thi soul in drought, and make fat thi bones: and thou shalt be
lik a water garden, and like a spring of water, whose water fail
not.

58:12 and they that shall be of thee shall build the old wast places:
th shalt rais up the foundat of mani generations; and thou
shalt be called, the repair of the breach, the restor of path to
dwel in.

58:13 If thou turn away thi foot from the sabbath, from do thy
pleasur on my holi day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holi of
th lord, honourable; and shalt honour him, not do thine own ways,
nor find thine own pleasure, nor speak thine own words: 58:14
then shalt thou delight thyself in the lord; and I will caus thee to
rid upon the high place of the earth, and feed thee with the
heritag of jacob thi father: for the mouth of the lord hath spoken
it.

59:1 behold, the lord' hand is not shortened, that it cannot save;
neith hi ear heavy, that it cannot hear: 59:2 but your iniquities
hav separ between you and your god, and your sin have hid his
fac from you, that he will not hear.

59:3 for your hand are defil with blood, and your finger with
iniquity; your lip have spoken lies, your tongu hath muttered
perverseness.

59:4 none calleth for justice, nor ani pleadeth for truth: they trust
in vanity, and speak lies; they conceiv mischief, and bring forth
iniquity.

59:5 they hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weav the spider' web: he that
eateth of their egg dieth, and that which is crush breaketh out
into a viper.

59:6 their web shall not becom garments, neither shall they cover
themselv with their works: their work are work of iniquity, and
th act of violenc is in their hands.

59:7 their feet run to evil, and they make hast to shed innocent
blood: their thought are thought of iniquity; wast and
destruct are in their paths.

59:8 the way of peac they know not; and there is no judgment in their
goings: they have made them crook paths: whosoev goeth therein
shal not know peace.

59:9 therefor is judgment far from us, neither doth justic overtake
us: we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we
walk in darkness.

59:10 We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had
no eyes: we stumbl at noon day as in the night; we are in desolate
plac as dead men.

59:11 We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for
judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.

59:12 for our transgress are multipli befor thee, and our sins
testifi against us: for our transgress are with us; and as for our
iniquities, we know them; 59:13 In transgress and lie against the
lord, and depart away from our god, speak oppress and revolt,
conceiv and utter from the heart word of falsehood.

59:14 and judgment is turn away backward, and justic standeth afar
off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equiti cannot enter.

59:15 yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh
himself a prey: and the lord saw it, and it displeas him that there
wa no judgment.

59:16 and he saw that there wa no man, and wonder that there wa no
intercessor: therefor hi arm brought salvat unto him; and his
righteousness, it sustain him.

59:17 for he put on righteous as a breastplate, and an helmet of
salv upon hi head; and he put on the garment of vengeanc for
clothing, and wa clad with zeal as a cloak.

59:18 accord to their deeds, accordingli he will repay, furi to his
adversaries, recomp to hi enemies; to the island he will repay
recompence.

59:19 So shall they fear the name of the lord from the west, and his
glori from the rise of the sun. when the enemi shall come in like a
flood, the spirit of the lord shall lift up a standard against him.

59:20 and the redeem shall come to zion, and unto them that turn
from transgress in jacob, saith the lord.

59:21 As for me, thi is my coven with them, saith the lord; my
spirit that is upon thee, and my word which I have put in thi mouth,
shal not depart out of thi mouth, nor out of the mouth of thi seed,
nor out of the mouth of thi seed' seed, saith the lord, from
henceforth and for ever.

60:1 arise, shine; for thi light is come, and the glori of the lord is
risen upon thee.

60:2 for, behold, the dark shall cover the earth, and gross
dark the people: but the lord shall aris upon thee, and hi glory
shal be seen upon thee.

60:3 and the gentil shall come to thi light, and king to the
bright of thi rising.

60:4 lift up thine eye round about, and see: all they gather
themselv together, they come to thee: thi son shall come from far,
and thi daughter shall be nurs at thi side.

60:5 then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall
fear, and be enlarged; becaus the abund of the sea shall be
convert unto thee, the forc of the gentil shall come unto thee.

60:6 the multitud of camel shall cover thee, the dromedari of
midian and ephah; all they from sheba shall come: they shall bring
gold and incense; and they shall shew forth the prais of the lord.

60:7 all the flock of kedar shall be gather togeth unto thee, the
ram of nebaioth shall minist unto thee: they shall come up with
accept on mine altar, and I will glorifi the hous of my glory.

60:8 who are these that fli as a cloud, and as the dove to their
windows?  60:9 sure the isl shall wait for me, and the ship of
tarshish first, to bring thi son from far, their silver and their
gold with them, unto the name of the lord thi god, and to the holi one
of israel, becaus he hath glorifi thee.

60:10 and the son of stranger shall build up thi walls, and their
k shall minist unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in
mi favour have I had merci on thee.

60:11 therefor thi gate shall be open continually; they shall not be
shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forc of the
gentiles, and that their king may be brought.

60:12 for the nation and kingdom that will not serv thee shall
perish; yea, those nation shall be utterli wasted.

60:13 the glori of lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the
pin tree, and the box together, to beautifi the place of my
sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.

60:14 the son also of them that afflict thee shall come bending
unto thee; and all they that despis thee shall bow themselv down
at the sole of thi feet; and they shall call thee; the citi of the
lord, the zion of the holi one of israel.

60:15 wherea thou ha been forsaken and hated, so that no man went
through thee, I will make thee an etern excellency, a joy of many
generations.

60:16 thou shalt also suck the milk of the gentiles, and shalt suck
th breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the lord am thy
saviour and thi redeemer, the mighti one of jacob.

60:17 for brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver,
and for wood brass, and for stone iron: I will also make thi officers
peace, and thine exactor righteousness.

60:18 violenc shall no more be heard in thi land, wast nor
destruct within thi borders; but thou shalt call thi walls
salvation, and thi gate praise.

60:19 the sun shall be no more thi light by day; neither for
bright shall the moon give light unto thee: but the lord shall be
unto thee an everlast light, and thi god thi glory.

60:20 thi sun shall no more go down; neither shall thi moon withdraw
itself: for the lord shall be thine everlast light, and the day of
thi mourn shall be ended.

60:21 thi peopl also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the
land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that i
may be glorified.

60:22 A littl one shall becom a thousand, and a small one a strong
nation: I the lord will hasten it in hi time.

61:1 the spirit of the lord god is upon me; becaus the lord hath
anoint me to preach good tide unto the meek; he hath sent me to
bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberti to the captives, and
th open of the prison to them that are bound; 61:2 To proclaim the
accept year of the lord, and the day of vengeanc of our god; to
comfort all that mourn; 61:3 To appoint unto them that mourn in zion,
to give unto them beauti for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
gar of prais for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be
cal tree of righteousness, the plant of the lord, that he might
b glorified.

61:4 and they shall build the old wastes, they shall rais up the
form desolations, and they shall repair the wast cities, the
desol of mani generations.

61:5 and stranger shall stand and feed your flocks, and the son of
th alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.

61:6 but ye shall be name the priest of the lord: men shall call you
th minist of our god: ye shall eat the rich of the gentiles, and
in their glori shall ye boast yourselves.

61:7 for your shame ye shall have double; and for confus they shall
rejoic in their portion: therefor in their land they shall possess
th double: everlast joy shall be unto them.

61:8 for I the lord love judgment, I hate robberi for burnt offering;
and I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting
coven with them.

61:9 and their seed shall be known among the gentiles, and their
offspr among the people: all that see them shall acknowledg them,
that they are the seed which the lord hath blessed.

61:10 I will greatli rejoic in the lord, my soul shall be joy in
mi god; for he hath cloth me with the garment of salvation, he hath
cov me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh
himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her
jewels.

61:11 for as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden
causeth the thing that are sown in it to spring forth; so the lord
god will caus righteous and prais to spring forth befor all the
nations.

62:1 for zion' sake will I not hold my peace, and for jerusalem's
sak I will not rest, until the righteous thereof go forth as
brightness, and the salvat thereof as a lamp that burneth.

62:2 and the gentil shall see thi righteousness, and all king thy
glory: and thou shalt be call by a new name, which the mouth of the
lord shall name.

62:3 thou shalt also be a crown of glori in the hand of the lord, and
a royal diadem in the hand of thi god.

62:4 thou shalt no more be term forsaken; neither shall thi land any
mor be term desolate: but thou shalt be call hephzibah, and thy
land beulah: for the lord delighteth in thee, and thi land shall be
married.

62:5 for as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thi son marry
thee: and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thi god
rejoic over thee.

62:6 I have set watchmen upon thi walls, O jerusalem, which shall
nev hold their peac day nor night: ye that make mention of the
lord, keep not silence, 62:7 and give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make jerusalem a prais in the earth.

62:8 the lord hath sworn by hi right hand, and by the arm of his
strength, sure I will no more give thi corn to be meat for thine
enemies; and the son of the stranger shall not drink thi wine, for
th which thou hast laboured: 62:9 but they that have gather it
shal eat it, and prais the lord; and they that have brought it
togeth shall drink it in the court of my holiness.

62:10 Go through, go through the gates; prepar ye the way of the
people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a
standard for the people.

62:11 behold, the lord hath proclaim unto the end of the world, say
y to the daughter of zion, behold, thi salvat cometh; behold, his
reward is with him, and hi work befor him.

62:12 and they shall call them, the holi people, the redeem of the
lord: and thou shalt be called, sought out, A citi not forsaken.

63:1 who is thi that cometh from edom, with dy garment from
bozrah?  thi that is gloriou in hi apparel, travel in the
great of hi strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighti to
save.

63:2 wherefor art thou red in thine apparel, and thi garment like
him that treadeth in the winefat?  63:3 I have trodden the winepress
alone; and of the peopl there wa none with me: for I will tread them
in mine anger, and trampl them in my fury; and their blood shall be
sprinkl upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

63:4 for the day of vengeanc is in mine heart, and the year of my
redeem is come.

63:5 and I looked, and there wa none to help; and I wonder that
ther wa none to uphold: therefor mine own arm brought salvation
unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.

63:6 and I will tread down the peopl in mine anger, and make them
drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.

63:7 I will mention the lovingkind of the lord, and the praises
of the lord, accord to all that the lord hath bestow on us, and
th great good toward the hous of israel, which he hath bestowed
on them accord to hi mercies, and accord to the multitud of
hi lovingkindnesses.

63:8 for he said, sure they are my people, children that will not
lie: so he wa their saviour.

63:9 In all their afflict he wa afflicted, and the angel of his
pres save them: in hi love and in hi piti he redeem them; and
h bare them, and carri them all the day of old.

63:10 but they rebelled, and vex hi holi spirit: therefor he was
turn to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

63:11 then he rememb the day of old, moses, and hi people,
saying, where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the
shepherd of hi flock? where is he that put hi holi spirit within
him?  63:12 that led them by the right hand of mose with hi glorious
arm, divid the water befor them, to make himself an everlasting
name?  63:13 that led them through the deep, as an hors in the
wilderness, that they should not stumble?  63:14 As a beast goeth down
into the valley, the spirit of the lord caus him to rest: so didst
thou lead thi people, to make thyself a gloriou name.

63:15 look down from heaven, and behold from the habit of thy
holi and of thi glory: where is thi zeal and thi strength, the
sound of thi bowel and of thi merci toward me? are they
restrained?  63:16 doubtless thou art our father, though abraham be
ignor of us, and israel acknowledg us not: thou, O lord, art our
father, our redeemer; thi name is from everlasting.

63:17 O lord, whi hast thou made us to err from thi ways, and hardened
our heart from thi fear? return for thi servants' sake, the tribe of
thin inheritance.

63:18 the peopl of thi holi have possess it but a littl while:
our adversari have trodden down thi sanctuary.

63:19 We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not
cal by thi name.

64:1 Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come
down, that the mountain might flow down at thi presence, 64:2 As when
th melt fire burneth, the fire causeth the water to boil, to make
thi name known to thine adversaries, that the nation may trembl at
thi presence!  64:3 when thou didst terribl thing which we looked
not for, thou camest down, the mountain flow down at thi presence.

64:4 for sinc the begin of the world men have not heard, nor
perceiv by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O god, besid thee,
what he hath prepar for him that waiteth for him.

64:5 thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those
that rememb thee in thi ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have
sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.

64:6 but we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
ar as filthi rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities,
lik the wind, have taken us away.

64:7 and there is none that calleth upon thi name, that stirreth up
himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thi face from us, and
hast consum us, becaus of our iniquities.

64:8 but now, O lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou
our potter; and we all are the work of thi hand.

64:9 Be not wroth veri sore, O lord, neither rememb iniqu for
ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thi people.

64:10 thi holi citi are a wilderness, zion is a wilderness,
jerusalem a desolation.

64:11 our holi and our beauti house, where our father praised
thee, is burn up with fire: and all our pleasant thing are laid
waste.

64:12 wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O lord? wilt thou
hold thi peace, and afflict us veri sore?  65:1 I am sought of them
that ask not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I said,
behold me, behold me, unto a nation that wa not call by my name.

65:2 I have spread out my hand all the day unto a rebelli people,
which walketh in a way that wa not good, after their own thoughts;
65:3 A peopl that provoketh me to anger continu to my face; that
sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incens upon altar of brick; 65:4
which remain among the graves, and lodg in the monuments, which eat
swine' flesh, and broth of abomin thing is in their vessels;
65:5 which say, stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier
than thou. these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the
day.

65:6 behold, it is written befor me: I will not keep silence, but
wil recompense, even recompens into their bosom, 65:7 your
iniquities, and the iniqu of your father together, saith the
lord, which have burn incens upon the mountains, and blasphem me
upon the hills: therefor will I measur their former work into their
bosom.

65:8 thu saith the lord, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and
on saith, destroy it not; for a bless is in it: so will I do for
mi servants' sakes, that I may not destroy them all.

65:9 and I will bring forth a seed out of jacob, and out of judah an
inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my
serv shall dwell there.

65:10 and sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of achor a
plac for the herd to lie down in, for my peopl that have sought me.

65:11 but ye are they that forsak the lord, that forget my holy
mountain, that prepar a tabl for that troop, and that furnish the
drink offer unto that number.

65:12 therefor will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow
down to the slaughter: becaus when I called, ye did not answer; when
i spake, ye did not hear; but did evil befor mine eyes, and did
choos that wherein I delight not.

65:13 therefor thu saith the lord god, behold, my servant shall
eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servant shall drink, but ye
shal be thirsty: behold, my servant shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed: 65:14 behold, my servant shall sing for joy of heart, but ye
shal cri for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexat of spirit.

65:15 and ye shall leav your name for a curs unto my chosen: for the
lord god shall slay thee, and call hi servant by anoth name: 65:16
that he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the
god of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the god
of truth; becaus the former troubl are forgotten, and becaus they
ar hid from mine eyes.

65:17 for, behold, I creat new heaven and a new earth: and the
form shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

65:18 but be ye glad and rejoic for ever in that which I create: for,
behold, I creat jerusalem a rejoicing, and her peopl a joy.

65:19 and I will rejoic in jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the
voic of weep shall be no more heard in her, nor the voic of
crying.

65:20 there shall be no more thenc an infant of days, nor an old man
that hath not fill hi days: for the child shall die an hundred
year old; but the sinner be an hundr year old shall be
accursed.

65:21 and they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

65:22 they shall not build, and anoth inhabit; they shall not plant,
and anoth eat: for as the day of a tree are the day of my people,
and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.

65:23 they shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for
they are the seed of the bless of the lord, and their offspr with
them.

65:24 and it shall come to pass, that befor they call, I will answer;
and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

65:25 the wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall
eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent' meat. they
shal not hurt nor destroy in all my holi mountain, saith the lord.

66:1 thu saith the lord, the heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
footstool: where is the hous that ye build unto me? and where is the
plac of my rest?  66:2 for all those thing hath mine hand made, and
al those thing have been, saith the lord: but to thi man will i
look, even to him that is poor and of a contrit spirit, and trembleth
at my word.

66:3 He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth
a lamb, as if he cut off a dog' neck; he that offereth an oblation,
a if he offer swine' blood; he that burneth incense, as if he
bless an idol.

yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in
their abominations.

66:4 I also will choos their delusions, and will bring their fears
upon them; becaus when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they
did not hear: but they did evil befor mine eyes, and chose that in
which I delight not.

66:5 hear the word of the lord, ye that trembl at hi word; your
brethren that hate you, that cast you out for my name' sake, said,
let the lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they
shal be ashamed.

66:6 A voic of nois from the city, a voic from the temple, a voice
of the lord that rendereth recomp to hi enemies.

66:7 befor she travailed, she brought forth; befor her pain came,
sh wa deliv of a man child.

66:8 who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? shall the
earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at
once?  for as soon as zion travailed, she brought forth her children.

66:9 shall I bring to the birth, and not caus to bring forth? saith
th lord: shall I caus to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy
god.

66:10 rejoic ye with jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that
lov her: rejoic for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: 66:11
that ye may suck, and be satisfi with the breast of her
consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delight with the
abund of her glory.

66:12 for thu saith the lord, behold, I will extend peac to her like
a river, and the glori of the gentil like a flow stream: then
shal ye suck, ye shall be born upon her sides, and be dandl upon
h knees.

66:13 As one whom hi mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye
shal be comfort in jerusalem.

66:14 and when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones
shal flourish like an herb: and the hand of the lord shall be known
toward hi servants, and hi indign toward hi enemies.

66:15 for, behold, the lord will come with fire, and with hi chariots
lik a whirlwind, to render hi anger with fury, and hi rebuk with
flam of fire.

66:16 for by fire and by hi sword will the lord plead with all flesh:
and the slain of the lord shall be many.

66:17 they that sanctifi themselves, and purifi themselv in the
garden behind one tree in the midst, eat swine' flesh, and the
abomination, and the mouse, shall be consum together, saith the
lord.

66:18 for I know their work and their thoughts: it shall come, that i
wil gather all nation and tongues; and they shall come, and see my
glory.

66:19 and I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that
escap of them unto the nations, to tarshish, pul, and lud, that draw
th bow, to tubal, and javan, to the isl afar off, that have not
heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declar my
glori among the gentiles.

66:20 and they shall bring all your brethren for an offer unto the
lord out of all nation upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters,
and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holi mountain jerusalem,
saith the lord, as the children of israel bring an offer in a clean
vessel into the hous of the lord.

66:21 and I will also take of them for priest and for levites, saith
th lord.

66:22 for as the new heaven and the new earth, which I will make,
shal remain befor me, saith the lord, so shall your seed and your
nam remain.

66:23 and it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another,
and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship
befor me, saith the lord.

66:24 and they shall go forth, and look upon the carcas of the men
that have transgress against me: for their worm shall not die,
neith shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring
unto all flesh.




th book of the prophet jeremiah


1:1 the word of jeremiah the son of hilkiah, of the priest that
wer in anathoth in the land of benjamin: 1:2 To whom the word of the
lord came in the day of josiah the son of amon king of judah, in the
thirteenth year of hi reign.

1:3 It came also in the day of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of
judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of zedekiah the son of josiah
k of judah, unto the carri away of jerusalem captiv in the
fifth month.

1:4 then the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 1:5 befor i
form thee in the belli I knew thee; and befor thou camest forth out
of the womb I sanctifi thee, and I ordain thee a prophet unto the
nations.

1:6 then said I, ah, lord god! behold, I cannot speak: for I am a
child.

1:7 but the lord said unto me, say not, I am a child: for thou shalt
go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoev I command thee thou
shalt speak.

1:8 Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliv thee,
saith the lord.

1:9 then the lord put forth hi hand, and touch my mouth. and the
lord said unto me, behold, I have put my word in thi mouth.

1:10 see, I have thi day set thee over the nation and over the
kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw
down, to build, and to plant.

1:11 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, jeremiah,
what seest thou? and I said, I see a rod of an almond tree.

1:12 then said the lord unto me, thou hast well seen: for I will
hasten my word to perform it.

1:13 and the word of the lord came unto me the second time, saying,
what seest thou? and I said, I see a seeth pot; and the face
thereof is toward the north.

1:14 then the lord said unto me, out of the north an evil shall break
forth upon all the inhabit of the land.

1:15 for, lo, I will call all the famili of the kingdom of the
north, saith the lord; and they shall come, and they shall set every
on hi throne at the enter of the gate of jerusalem, and against
al the wall thereof round about, and against all the citi of
judah.

1:16 and I will utter my judgment against them touch all their
wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burn incens unto other
gods, and worship the work of their own hands.

1:17 thou therefor gird up thi loins, and arise, and speak unto them
al that I command thee: be not dismay at their faces, lest i
confound thee befor them.

1:18 for, behold, I have made thee thi day a defenc city, and an
iron pillar, and brasen wall against the whole land, against the
k of judah, against the princ thereof, against the priests
thereof, and against the peopl of the land.

1:19 and they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail
against thee; for I am with thee, saith the lord, to deliv thee.

2:1 moreov the word of the lord came to me, saying, 2:2 Go and cry
in the ear of jerusalem, saying, thu saith the lord; I remember
thee, the kind of thi youth, the love of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that wa not sown.

2:3 israel wa holi unto the lord, and the firstfruit of his
increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them,
saith the lord.

2:4 hear ye the word of the lord, O hous of jacob, and all the
famili of the hous of israel: 2:5 thu saith the lord, what
iniqu have your father found in me, that they are gone far from
me, and have walk after vanity, and are becom vain?  2:6 neither
said they, where is the lord that brought us up out of the land of
egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts
and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death,
through a land that no man pass through, and where no man dwelt?
2:7 and I brought you into a plenti country, to eat the fruit
thereof and the good thereof; but when ye entered, ye defil my
land, and made mine heritag an abomination.

2:8 the priest said not, where is the lord? and they that handl the
law knew me not: the pastor also transgress against me, and the
prophet prophesi by baal, and walk after thing that do not
profit.

2:9 wherefor I will yet plead with you, saith the lord, and with your
children' children will I plead.

2:10 for pass over the isl of chittim, and see; and send unto kedar,
and consid diligently, and see if there be such a thing.

2:11 hath a nation chang their gods, which are yet no gods? but my
peopl have chang their glori for that which doth not profit.

2:12 Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribl afraid, be
y veri desolate, saith the lord.

2:13 for my peopl have commit two evils; they have forsaken me the
fountain of live waters, and hew them out cisterns, broken
cisterns, that can hold no water.

2:14 Is israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? whi is he spoiled?
2:15 the young lion roar upon him, and yelled, and they made his
land waste: hi citi are burn without inhabitant.

2:16 also the children of noph and tahapan have broken the crown of
thi head.

2:17 hast thou not procur thi unto thyself, in that thou hast
forsaken the lord thi god, when he led thee by the way?  2:18 and now
what hast thou to do in the way of egypt, to drink the water of
sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of assyria, to drink the
wat of the river?  2:19 thine own wicked shall correct thee,
and thi backslid shall reprov thee: know therefor and see that
it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the lord thy
god, and that my fear is not in thee, saith the lord god of hosts.

2:20 for of old time I have broken thi yoke, and burst thi bands; and
thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon everi high hill and
und everi green tree thou wanderest, play the harlot.

2:21 yet I had plant thee a nobl vine, wholli a right seed: how
then art thou turn into the degener plant of a strang vine unto
me?  2:22 for though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much
soap, yet thine iniqu is mark befor me, saith the lord god.

2:23 how canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after
baalim?  see thi way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art
a swift dromedari travers her ways; 2:24 A wild ass use to the
wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion
who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary
themselves; in her month they shall find her.

2:25 withhold thi foot from be unshod, and thi throat from thirst:
but thou saidst, there is no hope: no; for I have love strangers, and
aft them will I go.

2:26 As the thief is asham when he is found, so is the hous of
israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests,
and their prophets.

2:27 say to a stock, thou art my father; and to a stone, thou hast
brought me forth: for they have turn their back unto me, and not
their face: but in the time of their troubl they will say, arise, and
sav us.

2:28 but where are thi god that thou hast made thee? let them arise,
if they can save thee in the time of thi trouble: for accord to the
numb of thi citi are thi gods, O judah.

2:29 wherefor will ye plead with me? ye all have transgress against
me, saith the lord.

2:30 In vain have I smitten your children; they receiv no
correction: your own sword hath devour your prophets, like a
destroy lion.

2:31 O generation, see ye the word of the lord. have I been a
wild unto israel? a land of darkness? wherefor say my people,
w are lords; we will come no more unto thee?  2:32 can a maid forget
h ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my peopl have forgotten me
day without number.

2:33 whi trimmest thou thi way to seek love? therefor hast thou also
taught the wick one thi ways.

2:34 also in thi skirt is found the blood of the soul of the poor
innocents: I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.

2:35 yet thou sayest, becaus I am innocent, sure hi anger shall
turn from me. behold, I will plead with thee, becaus thou sayest, i
hav not sinned.

2:36 whi gaddest thou about so much to chang thi way? thou also shalt
b asham of egypt, as thou wast asham of assyria.

2:37 yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hand upon thine
head: for the lord hath reject thi confidences, and thou shalt not
prosp in them.

3:1 they say, If a man put away hi wife, and she go from him, and
becom anoth man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that
land be greatli polluted? but thou hast play the harlot with many
lovers; yet return again to me, saith the lord.

3:2 lift up thine eye unto the high places, and see where thou hast
not been lien with. In the way hast thou sat for them, as the arabian
in the wilderness; and thou hast pollut the land with thi whoredoms
and with thi wickedness.

3:3 therefor the shower have been withholden, and there hath been no
latt rain; and thou hadst a whore' forehead, thou refusedst to be
ashamed.

3:4 wilt thou not from thi time cri unto me, My father, thou art the
guid of my youth?  3:5 will he reserv hi anger for ever? will he
keep it to the end?  behold, thou hast spoken and done evil thing as
thou couldest.

3:6 the lord said also unto me in the day of josiah the king, hast
thou seen that which backslid israel hath done? she is gone up upon
everi high mountain and under everi green tree, and there hath played
th harlot.

3:7 and I said after she had done all these things, turn thou unto me.
but she return not. and her treacher sister judah saw it.

3:8 and I saw, when for all the caus wherebi backslid israel
commit adulteri I had put her away, and given her a bill of
divorce; yet her treacher sister judah fear not, but went and
play the harlot also.

3:9 and it came to pass through the light of her whoredom, that
sh defil the land, and commit adulteri with stone and with
stocks.

3:10 and yet for all thi her treacher sister judah hath not turned
unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the lord.

3:11 and the lord said unto me, the backslid israel hath justified
herself more than treacher judah.

3:12 Go and proclaim these word toward the north, and say, return,
th backslid israel, saith the lord; and I will not caus mine
ang to fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the lord, and I will
not keep anger for ever.

3:13 onli acknowledg thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed
against the lord thi god, and hast scatter thi way to the strangers
und everi green tree, and ye have not obey my voice, saith the
lord.

3:14 turn, O backslid children, saith the lord; for I am married
unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and
i will bring you to zion: 3:15 and I will give you pastor according
to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledg and understanding.

3:16 and it shall come to pass, when ye be multipli and increas in
th land, in those days, saith the lord, they shall say no more, the
ark of the coven of the lord: neither shall it come to mind:
neith shall they rememb it; neither shall they visit it; neither
shal that be done ani more.

3:17 At that time they shall call jerusalem the throne of the lord;
and all the nation shall be gather unto it, to the name of the
lord, to jerusalem: neither shall they walk ani more after the
imagin of their evil heart.

3:18 In those day the hous of judah shall walk with the hous of
israel, and they shall come togeth out of the land of the north to
th land that I have given for an inherit unto your fathers.

3:19 but I said, how shall I put thee among the children, and give
the a pleasant land, a goodli heritag of the host of nations? and i
said, thou shalt call me, My father; and shalt not turn away from me.

3:20 sure as a wife treacher departeth from her husband, so
hav ye dealt treacher with me, O hous of israel, saith the
lord.

3:21 A voic wa heard upon the high places, weep and supplications
of the children of israel: for they have pervert their way, and they
hav forgotten the lord their god.

3:22 return, ye backslid children, and I will heal your
backslidings.

behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the lord our god.

3:23 truli in vain is salvat hope for from the hills, and from the
multitud of mountains: truli in the lord our god is the salvat of
israel.

3:24 for shame hath devour the labour of our father from our youth;
their flock and their herds, their son and their daughters.

3:25 We lie down in our shame, and our confus covereth us: for we
hav sin against the lord our god, we and our fathers, from our
youth even unto thi day, and have not obey the voic of the lord
our god.

4:1 If thou wilt return, O israel, saith the lord, return unto me: and
if thou wilt put away thine abomin out of my sight, then shalt
thou not remove.

4:2 and thou shalt swear, the lord liveth, in truth, in judgment, and
in righteousness; and the nation shall bless themselv in him, and
in him shall they glory.

4:3 for thu saith the lord to the men of judah and jerusalem, break
up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.

4:4 circumcis yourselv to the lord, and take away the foreskin of
your heart, ye men of judah and inhabit of jerusalem: lest my fury
com forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, becaus of the
evil of your doings.

4:5 declar ye in judah, and publish in jerusalem; and say, blow ye
th trumpet in the land: cry, gather together, and say, assemble
yourselves, and let us go into the defenc cities.

4:6 set up the standard toward zion: retire, stay not: for I will
br evil from the north, and a great destruction.

4:7 the lion is come up from hi thicket, and the destroy of the
gentil is on hi way; he is gone forth from hi place to make thy
land desolate; and thi citi shall be laid waste, without an
inhabitant.

4:8 for thi gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce
ang of the lord is not turn back from us.

4:9 and it shall come to pass at that day, saith the lord, that the
heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the
priest shall be astonished, and the prophet shall wonder.

4:10 then said I, ah, lord god! sure thou hast greatli deceiv this
peopl and jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace; wherea the sword
reacheth unto the soul.

4:11 At that time shall it be said to thi peopl and to jerusalem, a
dri wind of the high place in the wilder toward the daughter of
mi people, not to fan, nor to cleanse, 4:12 even a full wind from
thos place shall come unto me: now also will I give sentenc against
them.

4:13 behold, he shall come up as clouds, and hi chariot shall be as
a whirlwind: hi hors are swifter than eagles. woe unto us! for we
ar spoiled.

4:14 O jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest
b saved. how long shall thi vain thought lodg within thee?  4:15
for a voic declareth from dan, and publisheth afflict from mount
ephraim.

4:16 make ye mention to the nations; behold, publish against
jerusalem, that watcher come from a far country, and give out their
voic against the citi of judah.

4:17 As keeper of a field, are they against her round about; because
sh hath been rebelli against me, saith the lord.

4:18 thi way and thi do have procur these thing unto thee; this
i thi wickedness, becaus it is bitter, becaus it reacheth unto
thin heart.

4:19 My bowels, my bowels! I am pain at my veri heart; my heart
maketh a nois in me; I cannot hold my peace, becaus thou hast heard,
o my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.

4:20 destruct upon destruct is cried; for the whole land is
spoiled: suddenli are my tent spoiled, and my curtain in a moment.

4:21 how long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the
trumpet?  4:22 for my peopl is foolish, they have not known me; they
ar sottish children, and they have none understanding: they are wise
to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.

4:23 I beheld the earth, and, lo, it wa without form, and void; and
th heavens, and they had no light.

4:24 I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills
mov lightly.

4:25 I beheld, and, lo, there wa no man, and all the bird of the
heaven were fled.

4:26 I beheld, and, lo, the fruit place wa a wilderness, and all
th citi thereof were broken down at the presenc of the lord, and
bi hi fierc anger.

4:27 for thu hath the lord said, the whole land shall be desolate;
yet will I not make a full end.

4:28 for thi shall the earth mourn, and the heaven abov be black;
becaus I have spoken it, I have purpos it, and will not repent,
neith will I turn back from it.

4:29 the whole citi shall flee for the nois of the horsemen and
bowmen; they shall go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks:
everi citi shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell therein.

4:30 and when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? though thou
clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments
of gold, though thou rentest thi face with painting, in vain shalt
thou make thyself fair; thi lover will despis thee, they will seek
thi life.

4:31 for I have heard a voic as of a woman in travail, and the
anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voic of
th daughter of zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her
hands, saying, woe is me now! for my soul is weari becaus of
murderers.

5:1 run ye to and fro through the street of jerusalem, and see now,
and know, and seek in the broad place thereof, if ye can find a man,
if there be ani that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and i
wil pardon it.

5:2 and though they say, the lord liveth; sure they swear falsely.

5:3 O lord, are not thine eye upon the truth? thou hast stricken
them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consum them, but they
hav refus to receiv correction: they have made their face harder
than a rock; they have refus to return.

5:4 therefor I said, sure these are poor; they are foolish: for
they know not the way of the lord, nor the judgment of their god.

5:5 I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for
they have known the way of the lord, and the judgment of their god:
but these have altogeth broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.

5:6 wherefor a lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of
th even shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their
cities: everi one that goeth out thenc shall be torn in pieces:
becaus their transgress are many, and their backslid are
increased.

5:7 how shall I pardon thee for this? thi children have forsaken me,
and sworn by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the full,
they then commit adultery, and assembl themselv by troop in
th harlots' houses.

5:8 they were as fed hors in the morning: everi one neigh after
hi neighbour' wife.

5:9 shall I not visit for these things? saith the lord: and shall not
mi soul be aveng on such a nation as this?  5:10 Go ye up upon her
walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take away her
battlements; for they are not the lord's.

5:11 for the hous of israel and the hous of judah have dealt very
treacher against me, saith the lord.

5:12 they have beli the lord, and said, It is not he; neither shall
evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine: 5:13 and the
prophet shall becom wind, and the word is not in them: thu shall it
b done unto them.

5:14 wherefor thu saith the lord god of hosts, becaus ye speak this
word, behold, I will make my word in thi mouth fire, and thi people
wood, and it shall devour them.

5:15 lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O hous of israel,
saith the lord: it is a mighti nation, it is an ancient nation, a
nat whose languag thou knowest not, neither understandest what
they say.

5:16 their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are all mighti men.

5:17 and they shall eat up thine harvest, and thi bread, which thy
son and thi daughter should eat: they shall eat up thi flock and
thin herds: they shall eat up thi vine and thi fig trees: they shall
impoverish thi fenc cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.

5:18 nevertheless in those days, saith the lord, I will not make a
ful end with you.

5:19 and it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, wherefor doeth the
lord our god all these thing unto us? then shalt thou answer them,
lik as ye have forsaken me, and serv strang god in your land, so
shal ye serv stranger in a land that is not your's.

5:20 declar thi in the hous of jacob, and publish it in judah,
saying, 5:21 hear now this, O foolish people, and without
understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear
not: 5:22 fear ye not me? saith the lord: will ye not trembl at my
presence, which have place the sand for the bound of the sea by a
perpetu decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the wave thereof
toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can
they not pass over it?  5:23 but thi peopl hath a revolt and a
rebelli heart; they are revolt and gone.

5:24 neither say they in their heart, let us now fear the lord our
god, that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in hi season:
h reserveth unto us the appoint week of the harvest.

5:25 your iniqu have turn away these things, and your sin have
withholden good thing from you.

5:26 for among my peopl are found wick men: they lay wait, as he
that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men.

5:27 As a cage is full of birds, so are their hous full of deceit:
therefor they are becom great, and waxen rich.

5:28 they are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deed of
th wicked: they judg not the cause, the caus of the fatherless, yet
they prosper; and the right of the needi do they not judge.

5:29 shall I not visit for these things? saith the lord: shall not my
soul be aveng on such a nation as this?  5:30 A wonder and
horr thing is commit in the land; 5:31 the prophet prophesy
falsely, and the priest bear rule by their means; and my peopl love
to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?  6:1 O ye
children of benjamin, gather yourselv to flee out of the midst of
jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in
bethhaccerem: for evil appeareth out of the north, and great
destruction.

6:2 I have liken the daughter of zion to a come and delicate
woman.

6:3 the shepherd with their flock shall come unto her; they shall
pitch their tent against her round about; they shall feed everi one
in hi place.

6:4 prepar ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon. woe
unto us! for the day goeth away, for the shadow of the even are
stretch out.

6:5 arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy her palaces.

6:6 for thu hath the lord of host said, hew ye down trees, and cast
a mount against jerusalem: thi is the citi to be visited; she is
wholli oppress in the midst of her.

6:7 As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her
wickedness: violenc and spoil is heard in her; befor me continually
i grief and wounds.

6:8 Be thou instructed, O jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee;
lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

6:9 thu saith the lord of hosts, they shall throughli glean the
remn of israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer
into the baskets.

6:10 To whom shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear?
behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold,
th word of the lord is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in
it.

6:11 therefor I am full of the furi of the lord; I am weari with
hold in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the
assembl of young men together: for even the husband with the wife
shal be taken, the age with him that is full of days.

6:12 and their hous shall be turn unto others, with their fields
and wive together: for I will stretch out my hand upon the
inhabit of the land, saith the lord.

6:13 for from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every
on is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the
priest everi one dealeth falsely.

6:14 they have heal also the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly, saying, peace, peace; when there is no peace.

6:15 were they asham when they had commit abomination? nay, they
wer not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefor they
shal fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they
shal be cast down, saith the lord.

6:16 thu saith the lord, stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for
th old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your souls. but they said, We will not walk therein.

6:17 also I set watchmen over you, saying, hearken to the sound of the
trumpet. but they said, We will not hearken.

6:18 therefor hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is
among them.

6:19 hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon thi people, even
th fruit of their thoughts, becaus they have not hearken unto my
words, nor to my law, but reject it.

6:20 To what purpos cometh there to me incens from sheba, and the
sweet cane from a far country? your burnt offer are not
acceptable, nor your sacrific sweet unto me.

6:21 therefor thu saith the lord, behold, I will lay stumblingblocks
befor thi people, and the father and the son togeth shall fall
upon them; the neighbour and hi friend shall perish.

6:22 thu saith the lord, behold, a peopl cometh from the north
country, and a great nation shall be rais from the side of the
earth.

6:23 they shall lay hold on bow and spear; they are cruel, and have no
mercy; their voic roareth like the sea; and they ride upon horses,
set in array as men for war against thee, O daughter of zion.

6:24 We have heard the fame thereof: our hand wax feeble: anguish
hath taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in travail.

6:25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for the sword
of the enemi and fear is on everi side.

6:26 O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow
thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an onli son, most bitter
lamentation: for the spoiler shall suddenli come upon us.

6:27 I have set thee for a tower and a fortress among my people, that
thou mayest know and tri their way.

6:28 they are all grievou revolters, walk with slanders: they are
brass and iron; they are all corrupters.

6:29 the bellow are burned, the lead is consum of the fire; the
found melteth in vain: for the wick are not pluck away.

6:30 reprob silver shall men call them, becaus the lord hath
reject them.

7:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord, saying, 7:2 stand in
th gate of the lord' house, and proclaim there thi word, and say,
hear the word of the lord, all ye of judah, that enter in at these
g to worship the lord.

7:3 thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, amend your ways
and your doings, and I will caus you to dwell in thi place.

7:4 trust ye not in lie words, saying, the templ of the lord, the
templ of the lord, the templ of the lord, are these.

7:5 for if ye throughli amend your way and your doings; if ye
throughli execut judgment between a man and hi neighbour; 7:6 If ye
oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not
innoc blood in thi place, neither walk after other god to your
hurt: 7:7 then will I caus you to dwell in thi place, in the land
that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.

7:8 behold, ye trust in lie words, that cannot profit.

7:9 will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and
burn incens unto baal, and walk after other god whom ye know not;
7:10 and come and stand befor me in thi house, which is call by my
name, and say, We are deliv to do all these abominations?  7:11 is
thi house, which is call by my name, becom a den of robber in
your eyes? behold, even I have seen it, saith the lord.

7:12 but go ye now unto my place which wa in shiloh, where I set my
nam at the first, and see what I did to it for the wicked of my
peopl israel.

7:13 and now, becaus ye have done all these works, saith the lord,
and I spake unto you, rise up earli and speaking, but ye heard not;
and I call you, but ye answer not; 7:14 therefor will I do unto
thi house, which is call by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the
plac which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to
shiloh.

7:15 and I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your
brethren, even the whole seed of ephraim.

7:16 therefor pray not thou for thi people, neither lift up cri nor
pray for them, neither make intercess to me: for I will not hear
thee.

7:17 seest thou not what they do in the citi of judah and in the
street of jerusalem?  7:18 the children gather wood, and the fathers
kindl the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cake to the
queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offer unto other gods, that
they may provok me to anger.

7:19 Do they provok me to anger? saith the lord: do they not provoke
themselv to the confus of their own faces?  7:20 therefor thus
saith the lord god; behold, mine anger and my furi shall be pour out
upon thi place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the tree of the
field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall
not be quenched.

7:21 thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; put your burnt
off unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh.

7:22 for I spake not unto your fathers, nor command them in the day
that I brought them out of the land of egypt, concern burnt
off or sacrifices: 7:23 but thi thing command I them, saying,
obey my voice, and I will be your god, and ye shall be my people: and
walk ye in all the way that I have command you, that it may be well
unto you.

7:24 but they hearken not, nor inclin their ear, but walk in the
counsel and in the imagin of their evil heart, and went
backward, and not forward.

7:25 sinc the day that your father came forth out of the land of
egypt unto thi day I have even sent unto you all my servant the
prophets, daili rise up earli and send them: 7:26 yet they
hearken not unto me, nor inclin their ear, but harden their
neck: they did wors than their fathers.

7:27 therefor thou shalt speak all these word unto them; but they
wil not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they
wil not answer thee.

7:28 but thou shalt say unto them, thi is a nation that obeyeth not
th voic of the lord their god, nor receiveth correction: truth is
perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

7:29 cut off thine hair, O jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a
lament on high places; for the lord hath reject and forsaken
th gener of hi wrath.

7:30 for the children of judah have done evil in my sight, saith the
lord: they have set their abomin in the hous which is call by
mi name, to pollut it.

7:31 and they have built the high place of tophet, which is in the
valley of the son of hinnom, to burn their son and their daughter in
th fire; which I command them not, neither came it into my heart.

7:32 therefore, behold, the day come, saith the lord, that it shall
no more be call tophet, nor the valley of the son of hinnom, but the
valley of slaughter: for they shall buri in tophet, till there be no
place.

7:33 and the carcas of thi peopl shall be meat for the fowl of
th heaven, and for the beast of the earth; and none shall fray them
away.

7:34 then will I caus to ceas from the citi of judah, and from the
street of jerusalem, the voic of mirth, and the voic of gladness,
th voic of the bridegroom, and the voic of the bride: for the land
shal be desolate.

8:1 At that time, saith the lord, they shall bring out the bone of
th king of judah, and the bone of hi princes, and the bone of the
priests, and the bone of the prophets, and the bone of the
inhabit of jerusalem, out of their graves: 8:2 and they shall
spread them befor the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven,
whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they
hav walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped:
they shall not be gathered, nor be buried; they shall be for dung upon
th face of the earth.

8:3 and death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residu of
them that remain of thi evil family, which remain in all the places
whith I have driven them, saith the lord of hosts.

8:4 moreov thou shalt say unto them, thu saith the lord; shall they
fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return?  8:5 whi then
i thi peopl of jerusalem slidden back by a perpetu backsliding?
they hold fast deceit, they refus to return.

8:6 I hearken and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented
him of hi wickedness, saying, what have I done? everi one turn to
hi course, as the hors rusheth into the battle.

8:7 yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appoint times; and the
turtl and the crane and the swallow observ the time of their coming;
but my peopl know not the judgment of the lord.

8:8 how do ye say, We are wise, and the law of the lord is with us?
lo, certainli in vain made he it; the pen of the scribe is in vain.

8:9 the wise men are ashamed, they are dismay and taken: lo, they
hav reject the word of the lord; and what wisdom is in them?  8:10
therefor will I give their wive unto others, and their field to
them that shall inherit them: for everi one from the least even unto
th greatest is given to covetousness, from the prophet even unto the
priest everi one dealeth falsely.

8:11 for they have heal the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly, saying, peace, peace; when there is no peace.

8:12 were they asham when they had commit abomination? nay, they
wer not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefor shall
they fall among them that fall: in the time of their visit they
shal be cast down, saith the lord.

8:13 I will sure consum them, saith the lord: there shall be no
grap on the vine, nor fig on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade;
and the thing that I have given them shall pass away from them.

8:14 whi do we sit still? assembl yourselves, and let us enter into
th defenc cities, and let us be silent there: for the lord our god
hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because
w have sin against the lord.

8:15 We look for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health,
and behold trouble!  8:16 the snort of hi hors wa heard from
dan: the whole land trembl at the sound of the neigh of his
strong ones; for they are come, and have devour the land, and all
that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.

8:17 for, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which
wil not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the lord.

8:18 when I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart is faint in
me.

8:19 behold the voic of the cri of the daughter of my peopl because
of them that dwell in a far country: Is not the lord in zion? is not
her king in her? whi have they provok me to anger with their graven
images, and with strang vanities?  8:20 the harvest is past, the
summ is ended, and we are not saved.

8:21 for the hurt of the daughter of my peopl am I hurt; I am black;
astonish hath taken hold on me.

8:22 Is there no balm in gilead; is there no physician there? whi then
i not the health of the daughter of my peopl recovered?  9:1 Oh that
mi head were waters, and mine eye a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!  9:2 oh
that I had in the wilder a lodg place of wayfar men; that i
might leav my people, and go from them! for they be all adulterers,
an assembl of treacher men.

9:3 and they bend their tongu like their bow for lies: but they are
not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil
to evil, and they know not me, saith the lord.

9:4 take ye heed everi one of hi neighbour, and trust ye not in any
brother: for everi brother will utterli supplant, and everi neighbour
wil walk with slanders.

9:5 and they will deceiv everi one hi neighbour, and will not speak
th truth: they have taught their tongu to speak lies, and weary
themselv to commit iniquity.

9:6 thine habit is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they
refus to know me, saith the lord.

9:7 therefor thu saith the lord of hosts, behold, I will melt them,
and tri them; for how shall I do for the daughter of my people?  9:8
their tongu is as an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit: one speaketh
peac to hi neighbour with hi mouth, but in heart he layeth his
wait.

9:9 shall I not visit them for these things? saith the lord: shall not
mi soul be aveng on such a nation as this?  9:10 for the mountains
wil I take up a weep and wailing, and for the habit of the
wild a lamentation, becaus they are burn up, so that none can
pass through them; neither can men hear the voic of the cattle; both
th fowl of the heaven and the beast are fled; they are gone.

9:11 and I will make jerusalem heaps, and a den of dragons; and I will
mak the citi of judah desolate, without an inhabitant.

9:12 who is the wise man, that may understand this? and who is he to
whom the mouth of the lord hath spoken, that he may declar it, for
what the land perisheth and is burn up like a wilderness, that none
passeth through?  9:13 and the lord saith, becaus they have forsaken
mi law which I set befor them, and have not obey my voice, neither
walk therein; 9:14 but have walk after the imagin of their
own heart, and after baalim, which their father taught them: 9:15
therefor thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; behold, i
wil feed them, even thi people, with wormwood, and give them water
of gall to drink.

9:16 I will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor
their father have known: and I will send a sword after them, till i
hav consum them.

9:17 thu saith the lord of hosts, consid ye, and call for the
mourn women, that they may come; and send for cun women, that
they may come: 9:18 and let them make haste, and take up a wail for
us, that our eye may run down with tears, and our eyelid gush out
with waters.

9:19 for a voic of wail is heard out of zion, how are we spoiled!
w are greatli confounded, becaus we have forsaken the land, because
our dwell have cast us out.

9:20 yet hear the word of the lord, O ye women, and let your ear
rec the word of hi mouth, and teach your daughter wailing, and
everi one her neighbour lamentation.

9:21 for death is come up into our windows, and is enter into our
palaces, to cut off the children from without, and the young men from
th streets.

9:22 speak, thu saith the lord, even the carcas of men shall fall
a dung upon the open field, and as the hand after the harvestman,
and none shall gather them.

9:23 thu saith the lord, let not the wise man glori in hi wisdom,
neith let the mighti man glori in hi might, let not the rich man
glori in hi riches: 9:24 but let him that glorieth glori in this,
that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the lord which
exercis lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth:
for in these thing I delight, saith the lord.

9:25 behold, the day come, saith the lord, that I will punish all
them which are circumcis with the uncircumcised; 9:26 egypt, and
judah, and edom, and the children of ammon, and moab, and all that are
in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for all these
n are uncircumcised, and all the hous of israel are
uncircumcis in the heart.

10:1 hear ye the word which the lord speaketh unto you, O hous of
israel: 10:2 thu saith the lord, learn not the way of the heathen,
and be not dismay at the sign of heaven; for the heathen are
dismay at them.

10:3 for the custom of the peopl are vain: for one cutteth a tree
out of the forest, the work of the hand of the workman, with the axe.

10:4 they deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails
and with hammers, that it move not.

10:5 they are upright as the palm tree, but speak not: they must needs
b borne, becaus they cannot go. Be not afraid of them; for they
cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good.

10:6 forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O lord; thou art
great, and thi name is great in might.

10:7 who would not fear thee, O king of nations? for to thee doth it
appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in
al their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

10:8 but they are altogeth brutish and foolish: the stock is a
doctrin of vanities.

10:9 silver spread into plate is brought from tarshish, and gold from
uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hand of the founder: blue
and purpl is their clothing: they are all the work of cun men.

10:10 but the lord is the true god, he is the live god, and an
everlast king: at hi wrath the earth shall tremble, and the
nat shall not be abl to abid hi indignation.

10:11 thu shall ye say unto them, the god that have not made the
heaven and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from
und these heavens.

10:12 He hath made the earth by hi power, he hath establish the
world by hi wisdom, and hath stretch out the heaven by his
discretion.

10:13 when he uttereth hi voice, there is a multitud of water in
th heavens, and he causeth the vapour to ascend from the end of the
earth; he maketh lightn with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of hi treasures.

10:14 everi man is brutish in hi knowledge: everi founder is
confound by the graven image: for hi molten imag is falsehood, and
ther is no breath in them.

10:15 they are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their
visit they shall perish.

10:16 the portion of jacob is not like them: for he is the former of
al things; and israel is the rod of hi inheritance: the lord of
host is hi name.

10:17 gather up thi ware out of the land, O inhabit of the
fortress.

10:18 for thu saith the lord, behold, I will sling out the
inhabit of the land at thi once, and will distress them, that
they may find it so.

10:19 woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous; but I said, truly
thi is a grief, and I must bear it.

10:20 My tabernacl is spoiled, and all my cord are broken: my
children are gone forth of me, and they are not: there is none to
stretch forth my tent ani more, and to set up my curtains.

10:21 for the pastor are becom brutish, and have not sought the
lord: therefor they shall not prosper, and all their flock shall be
scattered.

10:22 behold, the nois of the bruit is come, and a great commotion
out of the north country, to make the citi of judah desolate, and a
den of dragons.

10:23 O lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not
in man that walketh to direct hi steps.

10:24 O lord, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest
thou bring me to nothing.

10:25 pour out thi furi upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon
th famili that call not on thi name: for they have eaten up jacob,
and devour him, and consum him, and have made hi habitation
desolate.

11:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord saying, 11:2 hear ye
th word of thi covenant, and speak unto the men of judah, and to
th inhabit of jerusalem; 11:3 and say thou unto them, thu saith
th lord god of israel; curs be the man that obeyeth not the words
of thi covenant, 11:4 which I command your father in the day that
i brought them forth out of the land of egypt, from the iron furnace,
saying, obey my voice, and do them, accord to all which I command
you: so shall ye be my people, and I will be your god: 11:5 that I may
perform the oath which I have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a
land flow with milk and honey, as it is thi day. then answer i,
and said, So be it, O lord.

11:6 then the lord said unto me, proclaim all these word in the
citi of judah, and in the street of jerusalem, saying, hear ye the
word of thi covenant, and do them.

11:7 for I earnestli protest unto your father in the day that i
brought them up out of the land of egypt, even unto thi day, rising
earli and protesting, saying, obey my voice.

11:8 yet they obey not, nor inclin their ear, but walk everi one
in the imagin of their evil heart: therefor I will bring upon
them all the word of thi covenant, which I command them to do: but
they did them not.

11:9 and the lord said unto me, A conspiraci is found among the men of
judah, and among the inhabit of jerusalem.

11:10 they are turn back to the iniqu of their forefathers,
which refus to hear my words; and they went after other god to
serv them: the hous of israel and the hous of judah have broken my
coven which I made with their fathers.

11:11 therefor thu saith the lord, behold, I will bring evil upon
them, which they shall not be abl to escape; and though they shall
cri unto me, I will not hearken unto them.

11:12 then shall the citi of judah and inhabit of jerusalem go,
and cri unto the god unto whom they offer incense: but they shall not
sav them at all in the time of their trouble.

11:13 for accord to the number of thi citi were thi gods, o
judah; and accord to the number of the street of jerusalem have ye
set up altar to that shame thing, even altar to burn incens unto
baal.

11:14 therefor pray not thou for thi people, neither lift up a cry
or prayer for them: for I will not hear them in the time that they cry
unto me for their trouble.

11:15 what hath my belov to do in mine house, see she hath
wrought lewd with many, and the holi flesh is pass from thee?
when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.

11:16 the lord call thi name, A green oliv tree, fair, and of
goodli fruit: with the nois of a great tumult he hath kindl fire
upon it, and the branch of it are broken.

11:17 for the lord of hosts, that plant thee, hath pronounc evil
against thee, for the evil of the hous of israel and of the hous of
judah, which they have done against themselv to provok me to anger
in offer incens unto baal.

11:18 and the lord hath given me knowledg of it, and I know it: then
thou shewedst me their doings.

11:19 but I wa like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter;
and I knew not that they had devis devic against me, saying, let
u destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off
from the land of the living, that hi name may be no more remembered.

11:20 but, O lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the
rein and the heart, let me see thi vengeanc on them: for unto thee
hav I reveal my cause.

11:21 therefor thu saith the lord of the men of anathoth, that seek
thi life, saying, prophesi not in the name of the lord, that thou die
not by our hand: 11:22 therefor thu saith the lord of hosts, behold,
i will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their sons
and their daughter shall die by famine: 11:23 and there shall be no
remn of them: for I will bring evil upon the men of anathoth, even
th year of their visitation.

12:1 righteou art thou, O lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me
talk with thee of thi judgments: wherefor doth the way of the wicked
prosper?  wherefor are all they happi that deal veri treacherously?
12:2 thou hast plant them, yea, they have taken root: they grow,
yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far
from their reins.

12:3 but thou, O lord, knowest me: thou hast seen me, and tri mine
heart toward thee: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and
prepar them for the day of slaughter.

12:4 how long shall the land mourn, and the herb of everi field
wither, for the wicked of them that dwell therein? the beast are
consumed, and the birds; becaus they said, He shall not see our last
end.

12:5 If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have weari thee,
then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace,
wherein thou trustedst, they weari thee, then how wilt thou do in
th swell of jordan?  12:6 for even thi brethren, and the hous of
thi father, even they have dealt treacher with thee; yea, they
hav call a multitud after thee: believ them not, though they
speak fair word unto thee.

12:7 I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have
given the dearli belov of my soul into the hand of her enemies.

12:8 mine heritag is unto me as a lion in the forest; it crieth out
against me: therefor have I hate it.

12:9 mine heritag is unto me as a speckl bird, the bird round
about are against her; come ye, assembl all the beast of the field,
com to devour.

12:10 mani pastor have destroy my vineyard, they have trodden my
port under foot, they have made my pleasant portion a desolate
wilderness.

12:11 they have made it desolate, and be desol it mourneth unto
me; the whole land is made desolate, becaus no man layeth it to
heart.

12:12 the spoiler are come upon all high place through the
wilderness: for the sword of the lord shall devour from the one end of
th land even to the other end of the land: no flesh shall have peace.

12:13 they have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns: they have put
themselv to pain, but shall not profit: and they shall be asham of
your revenu becaus of the fierc anger of the lord.

12:14 thu saith the lord against all mine evil neighbours, that touch
th inherit which I have caus my peopl israel to inherit;
behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house
of judah from among them.

12:15 and it shall come to pass, after that I have pluck them out i
wil return, and have compass on them, and will bring them again,
everi man to hi heritage, and everi man to hi land.

12:16 and it shall come to pass, if they will dilig learn the
way of my people, to swear by my name, the lord liveth; as they
taught my peopl to swear by baal; then shall they be built in the
midst of my people.

12:17 but if they will not obey, I will utterli pluck up and destroy
that nation, saith the lord.

13:1 thu saith the lord unto me, Go and get thee a linen girdle, and
put it upon thi loins, and put it not in water.

13:2 So I got a girdl accord to the word of the lord, and put it
on my loins.

13:3 and the word of the lord came unto me the second time, saying,
13:4 take the girdl that thou hast got, which is upon thi loins, and
arise, go to euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock.

13:5 So I went, and hid it by euphrates, as the lord command me.

13:6 and it came to pass after mani days, that the lord said unto me,
arise, go to euphrates, and take the girdl from thence, which i
command thee to hide there.

13:7 then I went to euphrates, and digged, and took the girdl from
th place where I had hid it: and, behold, the girdl wa marred, it
wa profit for nothing.

13:8 then the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 13:9 thu saith
th lord, after thi manner will I mar the pride of judah, and the
great pride of jerusalem.

13:10 thi evil people, which refus to hear my words, which walk in
th imagin of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve
them, and to worship them, shall even be as thi girdle, which is good
for nothing.

13:11 for as the girdl cleaveth to the loin of a man, so have i
caus to cleav unto me the whole hous of israel and the whole house
of judah, saith the lord; that they might be unto me for a people, and
for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not
hear.

13:12 therefor thou shalt speak unto them thi word; thu saith the
lord god of israel, everi bottl shall be fill with wine: and they
shal say unto thee, Do we not certainli know that everi bottl shall
b fill with wine?  13:13 then shalt thou say unto them, thu saith
th lord, behold, I will fill all the inhabit of thi land, even
th king that sit upon david' throne, and the priests, and the
prophets, and all the inhabit of jerusalem, with drunkenness.

13:14 and I will dash them one against another, even the father and
th son together, saith the lord: I will not pity, nor spare, nor
hav mercy, but destroy them.

13:15 hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the lord hath spoken.

13:16 give glori to the lord your god, befor he caus darkness, and
befor your feet stumbl upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look
for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness.

13:17 but if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places
for your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears,
becaus the lord' flock is carri away captive.

13:18 say unto the king and to the queen, humbl yourselves, sit down:
for your princip shall come down, even the crown of your glory.

13:19 the citi of the south shall be shut up, and none shall open
them: judah shall be carri away captiv all of it, it shall be
wholli carri away captive.

13:20 lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north:
wher is the flock that wa given thee, thi beauti flock?  13:21
what wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? for thou hast taught
them to be captains, and as chief over thee: shall not sorrow take
thee, as a woman in travail?  13:22 and if thou say in thine heart,
wherefor come these thing upon me?  for the great of thine
iniqu are thi skirt discovered, and thi heel made bare.

13:23 can the ethiopian chang hi skin, or the leopard hi spots?
then may ye also do good, that are accustom to do evil.

13:24 therefor will I scatter them as the stubbl that passeth away
bi the wind of the wilderness.

13:25 thi is thi lot, the portion of thi measur from me, saith the
lord; becaus thou hast forgotten me, and trust in falsehood.

13:26 therefor will I discov thi skirt upon thi face, that thy
sham may appear.

13:27 I have seen thine adulteries, and thi neighings, the lewd of
thi whoredom, and thine abomin on the hill in the fields. woe
unto thee, O jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shall it
onc be?  14:1 the word of the lord that came to jeremiah concerning
th dearth.

14:2 judah mourneth, and the gate thereof languish; they are black
unto the ground; and the cri of jerusalem is gone up.

14:3 and their nobl have sent their littl one to the waters: they
cam to the pits, and found no water; they return with their vessels
empty; they were asham and confounded, and cover their heads.

14:4 becaus the ground is chapt, for there wa no rain in the earth,
th plowmen were ashamed, they cover their heads.

14:5 yea, the hind also calv in the field, and forsook it, because
ther wa no grass.

14:6 and the wild ass did stand in the high places, they snuf up
th wind like dragons; their eye did fail, becaus there wa no
grass.

14:7 O lord, though our iniqu testifi against us, do thou it for
thi name' sake: for our backslid are many; we have sin against
thee.

14:8 O the hope of israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why
shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfar man
that turneth asid to tarri for a night?  14:9 whi shouldest thou be
a a man astonied, as a mighti man that cannot save? yet thou, O lord,
art in the midst of us, and we are call by thi name; leav us not.

14:10 thu saith the lord unto thi people, thu have they love to
wander, they have not refrain their feet, therefor the lord doth
not accept them; he will now rememb their iniquity, and visit their
sins.

14:11 then said the lord unto me, pray not for thi peopl for their
good.

14:12 when they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer
burnt offer and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will
consum them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.

14:13 then said I, ah, lord god! behold, the prophet say unto them,
y shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will
giv you assur peac in thi place.

14:14 then the lord said unto me, the prophet prophesi lie in my
name: I sent them not, neither have I command them, neither spake
unto them: they prophesi unto you a fals vision and divination, and a
th of nought, and the deceit of their heart.

14:15 therefor thu saith the lord concern the prophet that
prophesi in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, sword and
famin shall not be in thi land; By sword and famin shall those
prophet be consumed.

14:16 and the peopl to whom they prophesi shall be cast out in the
street of jerusalem becaus of the famin and the sword; and they
shal have none to buri them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor
their daughters: for I will pour their wicked upon them.

14:17 therefor thou shalt say thi word unto them; let mine eye run
down with tear night and day, and let them not cease: for the virgin
daught of my peopl is broken with a great breach, with a very
griev blow.

14:18 If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the
sword!  and if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick
with famine!  yea, both the prophet and the priest go about into a
land that they know not.

14:19 hast thou utterli reject judah? hath thi soul loth zion? why
hast thou smitten us, and there is no heal for us? we look for
peace, and there is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold
trouble!  14:20 We acknowledge, O lord, our wickedness, and the
iniqu of our fathers: for we have sin against thee.

14:21 Do not abhor us, for thi name' sake, do not disgrac the throne
of thi glory: remember, break not thi coven with us.

14:22 are there ani among the vaniti of the gentil that can cause
rain? or can the heaven give showers? art not thou he, O lord our
god?  therefor we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these
things.

15:1 then said the lord unto me, though mose and samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be toward thi people: cast them out of my
sight, and let them go forth.

15:2 and it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, whither shall
w go forth? then thou shalt tell them, thu saith the lord; such as
ar for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword;
and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the
captivity, to the captivity.

15:3 and I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the lord: the
sword to slay, and the dog to tear, and the fowl of the heaven, and
th beast of the earth, to devour and destroy.

15:4 and I will caus them to be remov into all kingdom of the
earth, becaus of manasseh the son of hezekiah king of judah, for that
which he did in jerusalem.

15:5 for who shall have piti upon thee, O jerusalem? or who shall
bemoan thee? or who shall go asid to ask how thou doest?  15:6 thou
hast forsaken me, saith the lord, thou art gone backward: therefore
wil I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary
with repenting.

15:7 and I will fan them with a fan in the gate of the land; I will
bereav them of children, I will destroy my peopl sinc they return
not from their ways.

15:8 their widow are increas to me abov the sand of the seas: i
hav brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler
at noonday: I have caus him to fall upon it suddenly, and terrors
upon the city.

15:9 she that hath born seven languisheth: she hath given up the
ghost; her sun is gone down while it wa yet day: she hath been
asham and confounded: and the residu of them will I deliv to the
sword befor their enemies, saith the lord.

15:10 woe is me, my mother, that thou hast born me a man of strife
and a man of content to the whole earth! I have neither lent on
usury, nor men have lent to me on usury; yet everi one of them doth
curs me.

15:11 the lord said, verili it shall be well with thi remnant; verily
i will caus the enemi to entreat thee well in the time of evil and in
th time of affliction.

15:12 shall iron break the northern iron and the steel?  15:13 thy
subst and thi treasur will I give to the spoil without price,
and that for all thi sins, even in all thi borders.

15:14 and I will make thee to pass with thine enemi into a land
which thou knowest not: for a fire is kindl in mine anger, which
shal burn upon you.

15:15 O lord, thou knowest: rememb me, and visit me, and reveng me
of my persecutors; take me not away in thi longsuffering: know that
for thi sake I have suffer rebuke.

15:16 thi word were found, and I did eat them; and thi word wa unto
m the joy and rejoic of mine heart: for I am call by thi name, o
lord god of hosts.

15:17 I sat not in the assembl of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat
alon becaus of thi hand: for thou hast fill me with indignation.

15:18 whi is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth
to be healed? wilt thou be altogeth unto me as a liar, and as waters
that fail?  15:19 therefor thu saith the lord, If thou return, then
wil I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand befor me: and if thou
tak forth the preciou from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let
them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them.

15:20 and I will make thee unto thi peopl a fenc brasen wall: and
they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against
thee: for I am with thee to save thee and to deliv thee, saith the
lord.

15:21 and I will deliv thee out of the hand of the wicked, and i
wil redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.

16:1 the word of the lord came also unto me, saying, 16:2 thou shalt
not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have son or daughter in
thi place.

16:3 for thu saith the lord concern the son and concern the
daught that are born in thi place, and concern their mothers
that bare them, and concern their father that begat them in this
land; 16:4 they shall die of grievou deaths; they shall not be
lamented; neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon
th face of the earth: and they shall be consum by the sword, and by
famine; and their carcas shall be meat for the fowl of heaven, and
for the beast of the earth.

16:5 for thu saith the lord, enter not into the hous of mourning,
neith go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace
from thi people, saith the lord, even lovingkind and mercies.

16:6 both the great and the small shall die in thi land: they shall
not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves,
nor make themselv bald for them: 16:7 neither shall men tear
themselv for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither
shal men give them the cup of consol to drink for their father
or for their mother.

16:8 thou shalt not also go into the hous of feasting, to sit with
them to eat and to drink.

16:9 for thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; behold, i
wil caus to ceas out of thi place in your eyes, and in your days,
th voic of mirth, and the voic of gladness, the voic of the
bridegroom, and the voic of the bride.

16:10 and it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew thi peopl all
thes words, and they shall say unto thee, wherefor hath the lord
pronounc all thi great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or
what is our sin that we have commit against the lord our god?
16:11 then shalt thou say unto them, becaus your father have
forsaken me, saith the lord, and have walk after other gods, and
hav serv them, and have worship them, and have forsaken me, and
hav not kept my law; 16:12 and ye have done wors than your fathers;
for, behold, ye walk everi one after the imagin of hi evil
heart, that they may not hearken unto me: 16:13 therefor will I cast
you out of thi land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your
fathers; and there shall ye serv other god day and night; where i
wil not shew you favour.

16:14 therefore, behold, the day come, saith the lord, that it shall
no more be said, the lord liveth, that brought up the children of
israel out of the land of egypt; 16:15 but, the lord liveth, that
brought up the children of israel from the land of the north, and from
al the land whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again
into their land that I gave unto their fathers.

16:16 behold, I will send for mani fishers, saith the lord, and they
shal fish them; and after will I send for mani hunters, and they
shal hunt them from everi mountain, and from everi hill, and out of
th hole of the rocks.

16:17 for mine eye are upon all their ways: they are not hid from my
face, neither is their iniqu hid from mine eyes.

16:18 and first I will recompens their iniqu and their sin double;
becaus they have defil my land, they have fill mine inheritance
with the carcas of their detest and abomin things.

16:19 O lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refug in the day
of affliction, the gentil shall come unto thee from the end of the
earth, and shall say, sure our father have inherit lies, vanity,
and thing wherein there is no profit.

16:20 shall a man make god unto himself, and they are no gods?  16:21
therefore, behold, I will thi onc caus them to know, I will cause
them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name
i the lord.

17:1 the sin of judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the
point of a diamond: it is graven upon the tabl of their heart, and
upon the horn of your altars; 17:2 whilst their children remember
their altar and their grove by the green tree upon the high hills.

17:3 O my mountain in the field, I will give thi substanc and all thy
treasur to the spoil, and thi high place for sin, throughout all
thi borders.

17:4 and thou, even thyself, shalt discontinu from thine heritage
that I gave thee; and I will caus thee to serv thine enemi in the
land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindl a fire in mine anger,
which shall burn for ever.

17:5 thu saith the lord; curs be the man that trusteth in man, and
maketh flesh hi arm, and whose heart departeth from the lord.

17:6 for he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see
when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parch place in the
wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited.

17:7 bless is the man that trusteth in the lord, and whose hope the
lord is.

17:8 for he shall be as a tree plant by the waters, and that
spreadeth out her root by the river, and shall not see when heat
cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be care in the
year of drought, neither shall ceas from yield fruit.

17:9 the heart is deceit abov all things, and desper wicked:
who can know it?  17:10 I the lord search the heart, I tri the reins,
even to give everi man accord to hi ways, and accord to the
fruit of hi doings.

17:11 As the partridg sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he
that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leav them in the midst
of hi days, and at hi end shall be a fool.

17:12 A gloriou high throne from the begin is the place of our
sanctuary.

17:13 O lord, the hope of israel, all that forsak thee shall be
ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth,
becaus they have forsaken the lord, the fountain of live waters.

17:14 heal me, O lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be
saved: for thou art my praise.

17:15 behold, they say unto me, where is the word of the lord? let it
com now.

17:16 As for me, I have not hasten from be a pastor to follow
thee: neither have I desir the woeful day; thou knowest: that which
cam out of my lip wa right befor thee.

17:17 Be not a terror unto me: thou art my hope in the day of evil.

17:18 let them be confound that persecut me, but let not me be
confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring
upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with doubl destruction.

17:19 thu said the lord unto me; Go and stand in the gate of the
children of the people, wherebi the king of judah come in, and by the
which they go out, and in all the gate of jerusalem; 17:20 and say
unto them, hear ye the word of the lord, ye king of judah, and all
judah, and all the inhabit of jerusalem, that enter in by these
gates: 17:21 thu saith the lord; take heed to yourselves, and bear no
burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gate of jerusalem;
17:22 neither carri forth a burden out of your hous on the sabbath
day, neither do ye ani work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as i
command your fathers.

17:23 but they obey not, neither inclin their ear, but made their
neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receiv instruction.

17:24 and it shall come to pass, if ye dilig hearken unto me,
saith the lord, to bring in no burden through the gate of thi city
on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein;
17:25 then shall there enter into the gate of thi citi king and
princ sit upon the throne of david, ride in chariot and on
horses, they, and their princes, the men of judah, and the inhabitants
of jerusalem: and thi citi shall remain for ever.

17:26 and they shall come from the citi of judah, and from the
plac about jerusalem, and from the land of benjamin, and from the
plain, and from the mountains, and from the south, bring burnt
offerings, and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and
bring sacrific of praise, unto the hous of the lord.

17:27 but if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day,
and not to bear a burden, even enter in at the gate of jerusalem
on the sabbath day; then will I kindl a fire in the gate thereof,
and it shall devour the palac of jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched.

18:1 the word which came to jeremiah from the lord, saying, 18:2
arise, and go down to the potter' house, and there I will caus thee
to hear my words.

18:3 then I went down to the potter' house, and, behold, he wrought a
work on the wheels.

18:4 and the vessel that he made of clay wa mar in the hand of the
potter: so he made it again anoth vessel, as seem good to the
pott to make it.

18:5 then the word of the lord came to me, saying, 18:6 O hous of
israel, cannot I do with you as thi potter? saith the lord. behold,
a the clay is in the potter' hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house
of israel.

18:7 At what instant I shall speak concern a nation, and concerning
a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; 18:8 if
that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, i
wil repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

18:9 and at what instant I shall speak concern a nation, and
concern a kingdom, to build and to plant it; 18:10 If it do evil in
mi sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good,
wherewith I said I would benefit them.

18:11 now therefor go to, speak to the men of judah, and to the
inhabit of jerusalem, saying, thu saith the lord; behold, I frame
evil against you, and devis a devic against you: return ye now every
on from hi evil way, and make your way and your do good.

18:12 and they said, there is no hope: but we will walk after our own
devices, and we will everi one do the imagin of hi evil heart.

18:13 therefor thu saith the lord; ask ye now among the heathen, who
hath heard such things: the virgin of israel hath done a veri horrible
thing.

18:14 will a man leav the snow of lebanon which cometh from the rock
of the field? or shall the cold flow water that come from another
plac be forsaken?  18:15 becaus my peopl hath forgotten me, they
hav burn incens to vanity, and they have caus them to stumbl in
their way from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast
up; 18:16 To make their land desolate, and a perpetu hissing; every
on that passeth therebi shall be astonished, and wag hi head.

18:17 I will scatter them as with an east wind befor the enemy; i
wil shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their
calamity.

18:18 then said they, come and let us devis devic against jeremiah;
for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the
wise, nor the word from the prophet. come, and let us smite him with
th tongue, and let us not give heed to ani of hi words.

18:19 give heed to me, O lord, and hearken to the voic of them that
contend with me.

18:20 shall evil be recompens for good? for they have dig a pit
for my soul. rememb that I stood befor thee to speak good for them,
and to turn away thi wrath from them.

18:21 therefor deliv up their children to the famine, and pour out
their blood by the forc of the sword; and let their wive be bereaved
of their children, and be widows; and let their men be put to death;
let their young men be slain by the sword in battle.

18:22 let a cri be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a
troop suddenli upon them: for they have dig a pit to take me, and
hid snare for my feet.

18:23 yet, lord, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me:
forg not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thi sight,
but let them be overthrown befor thee; deal thu with them in the
tim of thine anger.

19:1 thu saith the lord, Go and get a potter' earthen bottle, and
tak of the ancient of the people, and of the ancient of the
priests; 19:2 and go forth unto the valley of the son of hinnom, which
i by the entri of the east gate, and proclaim there the word that i
shal tell thee, 19:3 and say, hear ye the word of the lord, O kings
of judah, and inhabit of jerusalem; thu saith the lord of hosts,
th god of israel; behold, I will bring evil upon thi place, the
which whosoev heareth, hi ear shall tingle.

19:4 becaus they have forsaken me, and have estrang thi place, and
hav burn incens in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their
fath have known, nor the king of judah, and have fill thi place
with the blood of innocents; 19:5 they have built also the high places
of baal, to burn their son with fire for burnt offer unto baal,
which I command not, nor spake it, neither came it into my mind:
19:6 therefore, behold, the day come, saith the lord, that thi place
shal no more be call tophet, nor the valley of the son of hinnom,
but the valley of slaughter.

19:7 and I will make void the counsel of judah and jerusalem in this
place; and I will caus them to fall by the sword befor their
enemies, and by the hand of them that seek their lives: and their
carcas will I give to be meat for the fowl of the heaven, and for
th beast of the earth.

19:8 and I will make thi citi desolate, and an hissing; everi one
that passeth therebi shall be astonish and hiss becaus of all the
plagu thereof.

19:9 and I will caus them to eat the flesh of their son and the
flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat everi one the flesh of
hi friend in the sieg and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and
they that seek their lives, shall straiten them.

19:10 then shalt thou break the bottl in the sight of the men that go
with thee, 19:11 and shalt say unto them, thu saith the lord of
hosts; even so will I break thi peopl and thi city, as one breaketh
a potter' vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall
buri them in tophet, till there be no place to bury.

19:12 thu will I do unto thi place, saith the lord, and to the
inhabit thereof, and even make thi citi as tophet: 19:13 and the
hous of jerusalem, and the hous of the king of judah, shall be
defil as the place of tophet, becaus of all the hous upon whose
roof they have burn incens unto all the host of heaven, and have
pour out drink offer unto other gods.

19:14 then came jeremiah from tophet, whither the lord had sent him to
prophesy; and he stood in the court of the lord' house; and said to
al the people, 19:15 thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel;
behold, I will bring upon thi citi and upon all her town all the
evil that I have pronounc against it, becaus they have hardened
their necks, that they might not hear my words.

20:1 now pashur the son of immer the priest, who wa also chief
governor in the hous of the lord, heard that jeremiah prophesied
thes things.

20:2 then pashur smote jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks
that were in the high gate of benjamin, which wa by the hous of the
lord.

20:3 and it came to pass on the morrow, that pashur brought forth
jeremiah out of the stocks. then said jeremiah unto him, the lord hath
not call thi name pashur, but magormissabib.

20:4 for thu saith the lord, behold, I will make thee a terror to
thyself, and to all thi friends: and they shall fall by the sword of
their enemies, and thine eye shall behold it: and I will give all
judah into the hand of the king of babylon, and he shall carri them
capt into babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.

20:5 moreov I will deliv all the strength of thi city, and all
th labour thereof, and all the preciou thing thereof, and all the
treasur of the king of judah will I give into the hand of their
enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them, and carri them to
babylon.

20:6 and thou, pashur, and all that dwell in thine hous shall go into
captivity: and thou shalt come to babylon, and there thou shalt die,
and shalt be buri there, thou, and all thi friends, to whom thou
hast prophesi lies.

20:7 O lord, thou hast deceiv me, and I wa deceived; thou art
strong than I, and hast prevailed: I am in deris daily, everi one
mocketh me.

20:8 for sinc I spake, I cri out, I cri violenc and spoil;
becaus the word of the lord wa made a reproach unto me, and a
derision, daily.

20:9 then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak ani more
in hi name. but hi word wa in mine heart as a burn fire shut up
in my bones, and I wa weari with forbearing, and I could not stay.

20:10 for I heard the defam of many, fear on everi side. report,
say they, and we will report it. all my familiar watch for my
halting, saying, peradventur he will be enticed, and we shall prevail
against him, and we shall take our reveng on him.

20:11 but the lord is with me as a mighti terribl one: therefor my
persecutor shall stumble, and they shall not prevail: they shall be
greatli ashamed; for they shall not prosper: their everlasting
confus shall never be forgotten.

20:12 but, O lord of hosts, that triest the righteous, and seest the
rein and the heart, let me see thi vengeanc on them: for unto thee
hav I open my cause.

20:13 sing unto the lord, prais ye the lord: for he hath delivered
th soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers.

20:14 curs be the day wherein I wa born: let not the day wherein my
moth bare me be blessed.

20:15 curs be the man who brought tide to my father, saying, a
man child is born unto thee; make him veri glad.

20:16 and let that man be as the citi which the lord overthrew, and
rep not: and let him hear the cri in the morning, and the
shout at noontide; 20:17 becaus he slew me not from the womb; or
that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb to be always
great with me.

20:18 wherefor came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow,
that my day should be consum with shame?  21:1 the word which came
unto jeremiah from the lord, when king zedekiah sent unto him pashur
th son of melchiah, and zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest,
saying, 21:2 enquire, I pray thee, of the lord for us; for
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon maketh war against us; if so be that
th lord will deal with us accord to all hi wondrou works, that
h may go up from us.

21:3 then said jeremiah unto them, thu shall ye say to zedekiah: 21:4
thu saith the lord god of israel; behold, I will turn back the
weapon of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the
k of babylon, and against the chaldeans, which besieg you without
th walls, and I will assembl them into the midst of thi city.

21:5 and I myself will fight against you with an outstretch hand and
with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.

21:6 and I will smite the inhabit of thi city, both man and
beast: they shall die of a great pestilence.

21:7 and afterward, saith the lord, I will deliv zedekiah king of
judah, and hi servants, and the people, and such as are left in this
citi from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into
th hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, and into the hand of their
enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life: and he shall
smit them with the edg of the sword; he shall not spare them,
neith have pity, nor have mercy.

21:8 and unto thi peopl thou shalt say, thu saith the lord; behold,
i set befor you the way of life, and the way of death.

21:9 He that abideth in thi citi shall die by the sword, and by the
famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to
th chaldean that besieg you, he shall live, and hi life shall be
unto him for a prey.

21:10 for I have set my face against thi citi for evil, and not for
good, saith the lord: it shall be given into the hand of the king of
babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

21:11 and touch the hous of the king of judah, say, hear ye the
word of the lord; 21:12 O hous of david, thu saith the lord; execute
judg in the morning, and deliv him that is spoil out of the
hand of the oppressor, lest my furi go out like fire, and burn that
non can quench it, becaus of the evil of your doings.

21:13 behold, I am against thee, O inhabit of the valley, and rock
of the plain, saith the lord; which say, who shall come down against
us? or who shall enter into our habitations?  21:14 but I will punish
y accord to the fruit of your doings, saith the lord: and I will
kindl a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things
round about it.

22:1 thu saith the lord; Go down to the hous of the king of judah,
and speak there thi word, 22:2 and say, hear the word of the lord, o
k of judah, that sittest upon the throne of david, thou, and thy
servants, and thi peopl that enter in by these gates: 22:3 thu saith
th lord; execut ye judgment and righteousness, and deliv the
spoil out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no
viol to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed
innoc blood in thi place.

22:4 for if ye do thi thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the
gat of thi hous king sit upon the throne of david, ride in
chariot and on horses, he, and hi servants, and hi people.

22:5 but if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, saith the
lord, that thi hous shall becom a desolation.

22:6 for thu saith the lord unto the king' hous of judah; thou art
gilead unto me, and the head of lebanon: yet sure I will make thee a
wilderness, and citi which are not inhabited.

22:7 and I will prepar destroy against thee, everi one with his
weapons: and they shall cut down thi choic cedars, and cast them into
th fire.

22:8 and mani nation shall pass by thi city, and they shall say
everi man to hi neighbour, wherefor hath the lord done thu unto
thi great city?  22:9 then they shall answer, becaus they have
forsaken the coven of the lord their god, and worship other
gods, and serv them.

22:10 weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for
him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see hi native
country.

22:11 for thu saith the lord touch shallum the son of josiah king
of judah, which reign instead of josiah hi father, which went forth
out of thi place; He shall not return thither ani more: 22:12 but he
shal die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall
se thi land no more.

22:13 woe unto him that buildeth hi hous by unrighteousness, and his
chamb by wrong; that useth hi neighbour' servic without wages,
and giveth him not for hi work; 22:14 that saith, I will build me a
wid hous and larg chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and it is
ciel with cedar, and paint with vermilion.

22:15 shalt thou reign, becaus thou closest thyself in cedar? did not
thi father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was
wel with him?  22:16 He judg the caus of the poor and needy; then
it wa well with him: wa not thi to know me? saith the lord.

22:17 but thine eye and thine heart are not but for thi covetousness,
and for to shed innoc blood, and for oppression, and for violence,
to do it.

22:18 therefor thu saith the lord concern jehoiakim the son of
josiah king of judah; they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my
brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, ah
lord! or, Ah hi glory!  22:19 He shall be buri with the burial of
an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gate of jerusalem.

22:20 Go up to lebanon, and cry; and lift up thi voic in bashan, and
cri from the passages: for all thi lover are destroyed.

22:21 I spake unto thee in thi prosperity; but thou saidst, I will not
hear. thi hath been thi manner from thi youth, that thou obeyedst not
mi voice.

22:22 the wind shall eat up all thi pastors, and thi lover shall go
into captivity: sure then shalt thou be asham and confound for
al thi wickedness.

22:23 O inhabit of lebanon, that makest thi nest in the cedars, how
graci shalt thou be when pang come upon thee, the pain as of a
woman in travail!  22:24 As I live, saith the lord, though coniah the
son of jehoiakim king of judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet
would I pluck thee thence; 22:25 and I will give thee into the hand of
them that seek thi life, and into the hand of them whose face thou
fearest, even into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, and
into the hand of the chaldeans.

22:26 and I will cast thee out, and thi mother that bare thee, into
anoth country, where ye were not born; and there shall ye die.

22:27 but to the land whereunto they desir to return, thither shall
they not return.

22:28 Is thi man coniah a despis broken idol? is he a vessel
wherein is no pleasure? wherefor are they cast out, he and hi seed,
and are cast into a land which they know not?  22:29 O earth, earth,
earth, hear the word of the lord.

22:30 thu saith the lord, write ye thi man childless, a man that
shal not prosper in hi days: for no man of hi seed shall prosper,
sit upon the throne of david, and rule ani more in judah.

23:1 woe be unto the pastor that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture! saith the lord.

23:2 therefor thu saith the lord god of israel against the pastors
that feed my people; Ye have scatter my flock, and driven them away,
and have not visit them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of
your doings, saith the lord.

23:3 and I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries
whith I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds;
and they shall be fruit and increase.

23:4 and I will set up shepherd over them which shall feed them: and
they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be
lacking, saith the lord.

23:5 behold, the day come, saith the lord, that I will rais unto
david a righteou branch, and a king shall reign and prosper, and
shal execut judgment and justic in the earth.

23:6 In hi day judah shall be saved, and israel shall dwell safely:
and thi is hi name wherebi he shall be called, the lord our
righteousness.

23:7 therefore, behold, the day come, saith the lord, that they shall
no more say, the lord liveth, which brought up the children of israel
out of the land of egypt; 23:8 but, the lord liveth, which brought up
and which led the seed of the hous of israel out of the north
country, and from all countri whither I had driven them; and they
shal dwell in their own land.

23:9 mine heart within me is broken becaus of the prophets; all my
bon shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath
overcome, becaus of the lord, and becaus of the word of his
holiness.

23:10 for the land is full of adulterers; for becaus of swear the
land mourneth; the pleasant place of the wilder are dri up, and
their cours is evil, and their forc is not right.

23:11 for both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my hous have i
found their wickedness, saith the lord.

23:12 wherefor their way shall be unto them as slipperi way in the
darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall therein: for I will bring
evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the lord.

23:13 and I have seen folli in the prophet of samaria; they
prophesi in baal, and caus my peopl israel to err.

23:14 I have seen also in the prophet of jerusalem an horribl thing:
they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands
of evildoers, that none doth return from hi wickedness; they are all
of them unto me as sodom, and the inhabit thereof as gomorrah.

23:15 therefor thu saith the lord of host concern the prophets;
behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water
of gall: for from the prophet of jerusalem is profan gone forth
into all the land.

23:16 thu saith the lord of hosts, hearken not unto the word of the
prophet that prophesi unto you: they make you vain: they speak a
vis of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the lord.

23:17 they say still unto them that despis me, the lord hath said, ye
shal have peace; and they say unto everi one that walketh after the
imagin of hi own heart, No evil shall come upon you.

23:18 for who hath stood in the counsel of the lord, and hath
perceiv and heard hi word? who hath mark hi word, and heard it?
23:19 behold, a whirlwind of the lord is gone forth in fury, even a
griev whirlwind: it shall fall grievous upon the head of the
wicked.

23:20 the anger of the lord shall not return, until he have executed,
and till he have perform the thought of hi heart: in the latter
day ye shall consid it perfectly.

23:21 I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesied.

23:22 but if they had stood in my counsel, and had caus my peopl to
hear my words, then they should have turn them from their evil way,
and from the evil of their doings.

23:23 Am I a god at hand, saith the lord, and not a god afar off?
23:24 can ani hide himself in secret place that I shall not see him?
saith the lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the lord.

23:25 I have heard what the prophet said, that prophesi lie in my
name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

23:26 how long shall thi be in the heart of the prophet that
prophesi lies? yea, they are prophet of the deceit of their own
heart; 23:27 which think to caus my peopl to forget my name by their
dream which they tell everi man to hi neighbour, as their fathers
hav forgotten my name for baal.

23:28 the prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that
hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. what is the chaff to
th wheat? saith the lord.

23:29 Is not my word like as a fire? saith the lord; and like a hammer
that breaketh the rock in pieces?  23:30 therefore, behold, I am
against the prophets, saith the lord, that steal my word everi one
from hi neighbour.

23:31 behold, I am against the prophets, saith the lord, that use
their tongues, and say, He saith.

23:32 behold, I am against them that prophesi fals dreams, saith the
lord, and do tell them, and caus my peopl to err by their lies, and
bi their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor command them: therefore
they shall not profit thi peopl at all, saith the lord.

23:33 and when thi people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask
thee, saying, what is the burden of the lord? thou shalt then say unto
them, what burden? I will even forsak you, saith the lord.

23:34 and as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that
shal say, the burden of the lord, I will even punish that man and his
house.

23:35 thu shall ye say everi one to hi neighbour, and everi one to
hi brother, what hath the lord answered? and, what hath the lord
spoken?  23:36 and the burden of the lord shall ye mention no more:
for everi man' word shall be hi burden; for ye have pervert the
word of the live god, of the lord of host our god.

23:37 thu shalt thou say to the prophet, what hath the lord answered
thee? and, what hath the lord spoken?  23:38 but sinc ye say, the
burden of the lord; therefor thu saith the lord; becaus ye say this
word, the burden of the lord, and I have sent unto you, saying, ye
shal not say, the burden of the lord; 23:39 therefore, behold, i,
even I, will utterli forget you, and I will forsak you, and the city
that I gave you and your fathers, and cast you out of my presence:
23:40 and I will bring an everlast reproach upon you, and a
perpetu shame, which shall not be forgotten.

24:1 the lord shew me, and, behold, two basket of fig were set
befor the templ of the lord, after that nebuchadrezzar king of
babylon had carri away captiv jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of
judah, and the princ of judah, with the carpent and smiths, from
jerusalem, and had brought them to babylon.

24:2 one basket had veri good figs, even like the fig that are first
ripe: and the other basket had veri naughti figs, which could not be
eaten, they were so bad.

24:3 then said the lord unto me, what seest thou, jeremiah? and i
said, figs; the good figs, veri good; and the evil, veri evil, that
cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

24:4 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:5 thu saith
th lord, the god of israel; like these good figs, so will i
acknowledg them that are carri away captiv of judah, whom I have
s out of thi place into the land of the chaldean for their good.

24:6 for I will set mine eye upon them for good, and I will bring
them again to thi land: and I will build them, and not pull them
down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.

24:7 and I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the lord: and
they shall be my people, and I will be their god: for they shall
return unto me with their whole heart.

24:8 and as the evil figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so evil;
sur thu saith the lord, So will I give zedekiah the king of judah,
and hi princes, and the residu of jerusalem, that remain in this
land, and them that dwell in the land of egypt: 24:9 and I will
deliv them to be remov into all the kingdom of the earth for
their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in
al place whither I shall drive them.

24:10 and I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among
them, till they be consum from off the land that I gave unto them
and to their fathers.

25:1 the word that came to jeremiah concern all the peopl of judah
in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah, that
wa the first year of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon; 25:2 the which
jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the peopl of judah, and to all
th inhabit of jerusalem, saying, 25:3 from the thirteenth year of
josiah the son of amon king of judah, even unto thi day, that is the
thre and twentieth year, the word of the lord hath come unto me, and
i have spoken unto you, rise earli and speaking; but ye have not
hearkened.

25:4 and the lord hath sent unto you all hi servant the prophets,
ris earli and send them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined
your ear to hear.

25:5 they said, turn ye again now everi one from hi evil way, and
from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the lord hath
given unto you and to your father for ever and ever: 25:6 and go not
aft other god to serv them, and to worship them, and provok me
not to anger with the work of your hands; and I will do you no hurt.

25:7 yet ye have not hearken unto me, saith the lord; that ye might
provok me to anger with the work of your hand to your own hurt.

25:8 therefor thu saith the lord of hosts; becaus ye have not heard
mi words, 25:9 behold, I will send and take all the famili of the
north, saith the lord, and nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon, my
servant, and will bring them against thi land, and against the
inhabit thereof, and against all these nation round about, and
wil utterli destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an
hissing, and perpetu desolations.

25:10 moreov I will take from them the voic of mirth, and the voice
of gladness, the voic of the bridegroom, and the voic of the bride,
th sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle.

25:11 and thi whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment;
and these nation shall serv the king of babylon seventi years.

25:12 and it shall come to pass, when seventi year are accomplished,
that I will punish the king of babylon, and that nation, saith the
lord, for their iniquity, and the land of the chaldeans, and will make
it perpetu desolations.

25:13 and I will bring upon that land all my word which I have
pronounc against it, even all that is written in thi book, which
jeremiah hath prophesi against all the nations.

25:14 for mani nation and great king shall serv themselv of them
also: and I will recompens them accord to their deeds, and
accord to the work of their own hands.

25:15 for thu saith the lord god of israel unto me; take the wine cup
of thi furi at my hand, and caus all the nations, to whom I send
thee, to drink it.

25:16 and they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, becaus of the
sword that I will send among them.

25:17 then took I the cup at the lord' hand, and made all the nations
to drink, unto whom the lord had sent me: 25:18 To wit, jerusalem, and
th citi of judah, and the king thereof, and the princ thereof,
to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse;
a it is thi day; 25:19 pharaoh king of egypt, and hi servants, and
hi princes, and all hi people; 25:20 and all the mingl people, and
al the king of the land of uz, and all the king of the land of the
philistines, and ashkelon, and azzah, and ekron, and the remnant of
ashdod, 25:21 edom, and moab, and the children of ammon, 25:22 and all
th king of tyrus, and all the king of zidon, and the king of the
isl which are beyond the sea, 25:23 dedan, and tema, and buz, and
al that are in the utmost corners, 25:24 and all the king of arabia,
and all the king of the mingl peopl that dwell in the desert,
25:25 and all the king of zimri, and all the king of elam, and all
th king of the medes, 25:26 and all the king of the north, far and
near, one with another, and all the kingdom of the world, which are
upon the face of the earth: and the king of sheshach shall drink after
them.

25:27 therefor thou shalt say unto them, thu saith the lord of
hosts, the god of israel; drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and
fall, and rise no more, becaus of the sword which I will send among
you.

25:28 and it shall be, if they refus to take the cup at thine hand to
drink, then shalt thou say unto them, thu saith the lord of hosts; ye
shal certainli drink.

25:29 for, lo, I begin to bring evil on the citi which is call by my
name, and should ye be utterli unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished:
for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabit of the earth,
saith the lord of hosts.

25:30 therefor prophesi thou against them all these words, and say
unto them, the lord shall roar from on high, and utter hi voic from
hi holi habitation; he shall mightili roar upon hi habitation; he
shal give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the
inhabit of the earth.

25:31 A nois shall come even to the end of the earth; for the lord
hath a controversi with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he
wil give them that are wick to the sword, saith the lord.

25:32 thu saith the lord of hosts, behold, evil shall go forth from
nat to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be rais up from the
coast of the earth.

25:33 and the slain of the lord shall be at that day from one end of
th earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be
lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the
ground.

25:34 howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselv in the ashes,
y princip of the flock: for the day of your slaughter and of your
dispers are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant
vessel.

25:35 and the shepherd shall have no way to flee, nor the principal
of the flock to escape.

25:36 A voic of the cri of the shepherds, and an howl of the
princip of the flock, shall be heard: for the lord hath spoiled
their pasture.

25:37 and the peaceabl habit are cut down becaus of the fierce
ang of the lord.

25:38 He hath forsaken hi covert, as the lion: for their land is
desol becaus of the fierc of the oppressor, and becaus of
hi fierc anger.

26:1 In the begin of the reign of jehoiakim the son of josiah king
of judah came thi word from the lord, saying, 26:2 thu saith the
lord; stand in the court of the lord' house, and speak unto all the
citi of judah, which come to worship in the lord' house, all the
word that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word:
26:3 If so be they will hearken, and turn everi man from hi evil way,
that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpos to do unto them
becaus of the evil of their doings.

26:4 and thou shalt say unto them, thu saith the lord; If ye will not
hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set befor you, 26:5 to
hearken to the word of my servant the prophets, whom I sent unto
you, both rise up early, and send them, but ye have not
hearkened; 26:6 then will I make thi hous like shiloh, and will make
thi citi a curs to all the nation of the earth.

26:7 So the priest and the prophet and all the peopl heard jeremiah
speak these word in the hous of the lord.

26:8 now it came to pass, when jeremiah had made an end of speaking
al that the lord had command him to speak unto all the people, that
th priest and the prophet and all the peopl took him, saying, thou
shalt sure die.

26:9 whi hast thou prophesi in the name of the lord, saying, this
hous shall be like shiloh, and thi citi shall be desol without an
inhabitant?  and all the peopl were gather against jeremiah in the
hous of the lord.

26:10 when the princ of judah heard these things, then they came up
from the king' hous unto the hous of the lord, and sat down in the
entri of the new gate of the lord' house.

26:11 then spake the priest and the prophet unto the princ and to
al the people, saying, thi man is worthi to die; for he hath
prophesi against thi city, as ye have heard with your ears.

26:12 then spake jeremiah unto all the princ and to all the people,
saying, the lord sent me to prophesi against thi hous and against
thi citi all the word that ye have heard.

26:13 therefor now amend your way and your doings, and obey the
voic of the lord your god; and the lord will repent him of the evil
that he hath pronounc against you.

26:14 As for me, behold, I am in your hand: do with me as seemeth good
and meet unto you.

26:15 but know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall
sur bring innoc blood upon yourselves, and upon thi city, and
upon the inhabit thereof: for of a truth the lord hath sent me
unto you to speak all these word in your ears.

26:16 then said the princ and all the peopl unto the priest and to
th prophets; thi man is not worthi to die: for he hath spoken to us
in the name of the lord our god.

26:17 then rose up certain of the elder of the land, and spake to all
th assembl of the people, saying, 26:18 micah the morasthite
prophesi in the day of hezekiah king of judah, and spake to all the
peopl of judah, saying, thu saith the lord of hosts; zion shall be
plow like a field, and jerusalem shall becom heaps, and the
mountain of the hous as the high place of a forest.

26:19 did hezekiah king of judah and all judah put him at all to
death?  did he not fear the lord, and besought the lord, and the lord
rep him of the evil which he had pronounc against them? thus
might we procur great evil against our souls.

26:20 and there wa also a man that prophesi in the name of the
lord, urijah the son of shemaiah of kirjathjearim, who prophesied
against thi citi and against thi land accord to all the word of
jeremiah.

26:21 and when jehoiakim the king, with all hi mighti men, and all
th princes, heard hi words, the king sought to put him to death: but
when urijah heard it, he wa afraid, and fled, and went into egypt;
26:22 and jehoiakim the king sent men into egypt, namely, elnathan the
son of achbor, and certain men with him into egypt.

26:23 and they fetch forth urijah out of egypt, and brought him unto
jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast hi dead
bodi into the grave of the common people.

26:24 nevertheless the hand of ahikam the son of shaphan wa with
jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the peopl to
put him to death.

27:1 In the begin of the reign of jehoiakim the son of josiah king
of judah came thi word unto jeremiah from the lord, saying, 27:2 thus
saith the lord to me; make thee bond and yokes, and put them upon thy
neck, 27:3 and send them to the king of edom, and to the king of moab,
and to the king of the ammonites, and to the king of tyrus, and to the
k of zidon, by the hand of the messeng which come to jerusalem
unto zedekiah king of judah; 27:4 and command them to say unto their
masters, thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; thu shall
y say unto your masters; 27:5 I have made the earth, the man and the
beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my
outstretch arm, and have given it unto whom it seem meet unto me.

27:6 and now have I given all these land into the hand of
nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon, my servant; and the beast of the
field have I given him also to serv him.

27:7 and all nation shall serv him, and hi son, and hi son' son,
until the veri time of hi land come: and then mani nation and great
k shall serv themselv of him.

27:8 and it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will
not serv the same nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon, and that will
not put their neck under the yoke of the king of babylon, that nation
wil I punish, saith the lord, with the sword, and with the famine,
and with the pestilence, until I have consum them by hi hand.

27:9 therefor hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners,
nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers,
which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serv the king of babylon:
27:10 for they prophesi a lie unto you, to remov you far from your
land; and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.

27:11 but the nation that bring their neck under the yoke of the king
of babylon, and serv him, those will I let remain still in their own
land, saith the lord; and they shall till it, and dwell therein.

27:12 I spake also to zedekiah king of judah accord to all these
words, saying, bring your neck under the yoke of the king of babylon,
and serv him and hi people, and live.

27:13 whi will ye die, thou and thi people, by the sword, by the
famine, and by the pestilence, as the lord hath spoken against the
nat that will not serv the king of babylon?  27:14 therefore
hearken not unto the word of the prophet that speak unto you,
saying, Ye shall not serv the king of babylon: for they prophesi a
li unto you.

27:15 for I have not sent them, saith the lord, yet they prophesi a
li in my name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish,
ye, and the prophet that prophesi unto you.

27:16 also I spake to the priest and to all thi people, saying, thus
saith the lord; hearken not to the word of your prophet that
prophesi unto you, saying, behold, the vessel of the lord' house
shal now shortli be brought again from babylon: for they prophesi a
li unto you.

27:17 hearken not unto them; serv the king of babylon, and live:
wherefor should thi citi be laid waste?  27:18 but if they be
prophets, and if the word of the lord be with them, let them now make
intercess to the lord of hosts, that the vessel which are left in
th hous of the lord, and in the hous of the king of judah, and at
jerusalem, go not to babylon.

27:19 for thu saith the lord of host concern the pillars, and
concern the sea, and concern the bases, and concern the
residu of the vessel that remain in thi city.

27:20 which nebuchadnezzar king of babylon took not, when he carried
away captiv jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of judah from
jerusalem to babylon, and all the nobl of judah and jerusalem; 27:21
yea, thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, concern the
vessel that remain in the hous of the lord, and in the hous of the
k of judah and of jerusalem; 27:22 they shall be carri to
babylon, and there shall they be until the day that I visit them,
saith the lord; then will I bring them up, and restor them to this
place.

28:1 and it came to pass the same year, in the begin of the reign
of zedekiah king of judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month,
that hananiah the son of azur the prophet, which wa of gibeon, spake
unto me in the hous of the lord, in the presenc of the priest and
of all the people, saying, 28:2 thu speaketh the lord of hosts, the
god of israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of babylon.

28:3 within two full year will I bring again into thi place all the
vessel of the lord' house, that nebuchadnezzar king of babylon took
away from thi place, and carri them to babylon: 28:4 and I will
br again to thi place jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of judah,
with all the captiv of judah, that went into babylon, saith the
lord: for I will break the yoke of the king of babylon.

28:5 then the prophet jeremiah said unto the prophet hananiah in the
pres of the priests, and in the presenc of all the peopl that
stood in the hous of the lord, 28:6 even the prophet jeremiah said,
amen: the lord do so: the lord perform thi word which thou hast
prophesied, to bring again the vessel of the lord' house, and all
that is carri away captive, from babylon into thi place.

28:7 nevertheless hear thou now thi word that I speak in thine ears,
and in the ear of all the people; 28:8 the prophet that have been
befor me and befor thee of old prophesi both against many
countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of
pestilence.

28:9 the prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the
prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the
lord hath truli sent him.

28:10 then hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet
jeremiah' neck, and brake it.

28:11 and hananiah spake in the presenc of all the people, saying,
thu saith the lord; even so will I break the yoke of nebuchadnezzar
k of babylon from the neck of all nation within the space of two
ful years. and the prophet jeremiah went hi way.

28:12 then the word of the lord came unto jeremiah the prophet, after
that hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the
prophet jeremiah, saying, 28:13 Go and tell hananiah, saying, thus
saith the lord; thou hast broken the yoke of wood; but thou shalt
mak for them yoke of iron.

28:14 for thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; I have put
a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon; and they shall serv him: and I have
given him the beast of the field also.

28:15 then said the prophet jeremiah unto hananiah the prophet, hear
now, hananiah; the lord hath not sent thee; but thou makest this
peopl to trust in a lie.

28:16 therefor thu saith the lord; behold, I will cast thee from off
th face of the earth: thi year thou shalt die, becaus thou hast
taught rebellion against the lord.

28:17 So hananiah the prophet die the same year in the seventh month.

29:1 now these are the word of the letter that jeremiah the prophet
s from jerusalem unto the residu of the elder which were carried
away captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the
peopl whom nebuchadnezzar had carri away captiv from jerusalem to
babylon; 29:2 (after that jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the
eunuchs, the princ of judah and jerusalem, and the carpenters, and
th smiths, were depart from jerusalem;) 29:3 By the hand of elasah
th son of shaphan, and gemariah the son of hilkiah, (whom zedekiah
k of judah sent unto babylon to nebuchadnezzar king of babylon)
saying, 29:4 thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, unto all
that are carri away captives, whom I have caus to be carri away
from jerusalem unto babylon; 29:5 build ye houses, and dwell in them;
and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them; 29:6 take ye wives, and
beget son and daughters; and take wive for your sons, and give your
daught to husbands, that they may bear son and daughters; that ye
may be increas there, and not diminished.

29:7 and seek the peac of the citi whither I have caus you to be
carri away captives, and pray unto the lord for it: for in the peace
thereof shall ye have peace.

29:8 for thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; let not your
prophet and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceiv you,
neith hearken to your dream which ye caus to be dreamed.

29:9 for they prophesi fals unto you in my name: I have not sent
them, saith the lord.

29:10 for thu saith the lord, that after seventi year be
accomplish at babylon I will visit you, and perform my good word
toward you, in caus you to return to thi place.

29:11 for I know the thought that I think toward you, saith the lord,
thought of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expect end.

29:12 then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me,
and I will hearken unto you.

29:13 and ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me
with all your heart.

29:14 and I will be found of you, saith the lord: and I will turn away
your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from
al the place whither I have driven you, saith the lord; and I will
br you again into the place whenc I caus you to be carri away
captive.

29:15 becaus ye have said, the lord hath rais us up prophet in
babylon; 29:16 know that thu saith the lord of the king that sitteth
upon the throne of david, and of all the peopl that dwelleth in this
city, and of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into
captivity; 29:17 thu saith the lord of hosts; behold, I will send
upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make
them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

29:18 and I will persecut them with the sword, with the famine, and
with the pestilence, and will deliv them to be remov to all the
kingdom of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an
hissing, and a reproach, among all the nation whither I have driven
them: 29:19 becaus they have not hearken to my words, saith the
lord, which I sent unto them by my servant the prophets, rise up
earli and send them; but ye would not hear, saith the lord.

29:20 hear ye therefor the word of the lord, all ye of the captivity,
whom I have sent from jerusalem to babylon: 29:21 thu saith the lord
of hosts, the god of israel, of ahab the son of kolaiah, and of
zedekiah the son of maaseiah, which prophesi a lie unto you in my
name; behold, I will deliv them into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king
of babylon; and he shall slay them befor your eyes; 29:22 and of them
shal be taken up a curs by all the captiv of judah which are in
babylon, saying, the lord make thee like zedekiah and like ahab, whom
th king of babylon roast in the fire; 29:23 becaus they have
commit villani in israel, and have commit adulteri with their
neighbours' wives, and have spoken lie word in my name, which i
hav not command them; even I know, and am a witness, saith the
lord.

29:24 thu shalt thou also speak to shemaiah the nehelamite, saying,
29:25 thu speaketh the lord of hosts, the god of israel, saying,
becaus thou hast sent letter in thi name unto all the peopl that
ar at jerusalem, and to zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest, and
to all the priests, saying, 29:26 the lord hath made thee priest in
th stead of jehoiada the priest, that ye should be offic in the
hous of the lord, for everi man that is mad, and maketh himself a
prophet, that thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks.

29:27 now therefor whi hast thou not reprov jeremiah of anathoth,
which maketh himself a prophet to you?  29:28 for therefor he sent
unto us in babylon, saying, thi captiv is long: build ye houses,
and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

29:29 and zephaniah the priest read thi letter in the ear of
jeremiah the prophet.

29:30 then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah, saying, 29:31 send
to all them of the captivity, saying, thu saith the lord concerning
shemaiah the nehelamite; becaus that shemaiah hath prophesi unto
you, and I sent him not, and he caus you to trust in a lie: 29:32
therefor thu saith the lord; behold, I will punish shemaiah the
nehelamite, and hi seed: he shall not have a man to dwell among this
people; neither shall he behold the good that I will do for my people,
saith the lord; becaus he hath taught rebellion against the lord.

30:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord, saying, 30:2 thus
speaketh the lord god of israel, saying, write thee all the word that
i have spoken unto thee in a book.

30:3 for, lo, the day come, saith the lord, that I will bring again
th captiv of my peopl israel and judah, saith the lord: and i
wil caus them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers,
and they shall possess it.

30:4 and these are the word that the lord spake concern israel and
concern judah.

30:5 for thu saith the lord; We have heard a voic of trembling, of
fear, and not of peace.

30:6 ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child?
wherefor do I see everi man with hi hand on hi loins, as a woman
in travail, and all face are turn into paleness?  30:7 alas! for
that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of
jacob' trouble, but he shall be save out of it.

30:8 for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord of hosts,
that I will break hi yoke from off thi neck, and will burst thy
bonds, and stranger shall no more serv themselv of him: 30:9 but
they shall serv the lord their god, and david their king, whom I will
rais up unto them.

30:10 therefor fear thou not, O my servant jacob, saith the lord;
neith be dismayed, O israel: for, lo, I will save thee from afar,
and thi seed from the land of their captivity; and jacob shall return,
and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

30:11 for I am with thee, saith the lord, to save thee: though I make
a full end of all nation whither I have scatter thee, yet I will
not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and
wil not leav thee altogeth unpunished.

30:12 for thu saith the lord, thi bruis is incurable, and thi wound
i grievous.

30:13 there is none to plead thi cause, that thou mayest be bound up:
thou hast no heal medicines.

30:14 all thi lover have forgotten thee; they seek thee not; for i
hav wound thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastis of
a cruel one, for the multitud of thine iniquity; becaus thi sins
wer increased.

30:15 whi criest thou for thine affliction? thi sorrow is incurable
for the multitud of thine iniquity: becaus thi sin were increased,
i have done these thing unto thee.

30:16 therefor all they that devour thee shall be devoured; and all
thin adversaries, everi one of them, shall go into captivity; and
they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee
wil I give for a prey.

30:17 for I will restor health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy
wounds, saith the lord; becaus they call thee an outcast, saying,
thi is zion, whom no man seeketh after.

30:18 thu saith the lord; behold, I will bring again the captiv of
jacob' tents, and have merci on hi dwellingplaces; and the city
shal be build upon her own heap, and the palac shall remain after
th manner thereof.

30:19 and out of them shall proceed thanksgiv and the voic of them
that make merry: and I will multipli them, and they shall not be few;
i will also glorifi them, and they shall not be small.

30:20 their children also shall be as aforetime, and their
congreg shall be establish befor me, and I will punish all
that oppress them.

30:21 and their nobl shall be of themselves, and their governor
shal proceed from the midst of them; and I will caus him to draw
near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is thi that engag his
heart to approach unto me? saith the lord.

30:22 and ye shall be my people, and I will be your god.

30:23 behold, the whirlwind of the lord goeth forth with fury, a
continu whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon the head of the
wicked.

30:24 the fierc anger of the lord shall not return, until he hath
don it, and until he have perform the intent of hi heart: in the
latt day ye shall consid it.

31:1 At the same time, saith the lord, will I be the god of all the
famili of israel, and they shall be my people.

31:2 thu saith the lord, the peopl which were left of the sword
found grace in the wilderness; even israel, when I went to caus him
to rest.

31:3 the lord hath appear of old unto me, saying, yea, I have loved
the with an everlast love: therefor with lovingkind have i
drawn thee.

31:4 again I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of
israel: thou shalt again be adorn with thi tabrets, and shalt go
forth in the danc of them that make merry.

31:5 thou shalt yet plant vine upon the mountain of samaria: the
plant shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.

31:6 for there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount
ephraim shall cry, aris ye, and let us go up to zion unto the lord
our god.

31:7 for thu saith the lord; sing with glad for jacob, and shout
among the chief of the nations: publish ye, prais ye, and say, o
lord, save thi people, the remnant of israel.

31:8 behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them
from the coast of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame,
th woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a
great compani shall return thither.

31:9 they shall come with weeping, and with supplic will I lead
them: I will caus them to walk by the river of water in a straight
way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to israel, and
ephraim is my firstborn.

31:10 hear the word of the lord, O ye nations, and declar it in the
isl afar off, and say, He that scatter israel will gather him, and
keep him, as a shepherd doth hi flock.

31:11 for the lord hath redeem jacob, and ransom him from the hand
of him that wa stronger than he.

31:12 therefor they shall come and sing in the height of zion, and
shal flow togeth to the good of the lord, for wheat, and for
wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and
their soul shall be as a water garden; and they shall not sorrow any
mor at all.

31:13 then shall the virgin rejoic in the dance, both young men and
old together: for I will turn their mourn into joy, and will
comfort them, and make them rejoic from their sorrow.

31:14 and I will satiat the soul of the priest with fatness, and my
peopl shall be satisfi with my goodness, saith the lord.

31:15 thu saith the lord; A voic wa heard in ramah, lamentation,
and bitter weeping; rahel weep for her children refus to be
comfort for her children, becaus they were not.

31:16 thu saith the lord; refrain thi voic from weeping, and thine
ey from tears: for thi work shall be rewarded, saith the lord; and
they shall come again from the land of the enemy.

31:17 and there is hope in thine end, saith the lord, that thy
children shall come again to their own border.

31:18 I have sure heard ephraim bemoan himself thus; thou hast
chastis me, and I wa chastised, as a bullock unaccustom to the
yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the lord my
god.

31:19 sure after that I wa turned, I repented; and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I wa ashamed, yea, even
confounded, becaus I did bear the reproach of my youth.

31:20 Is ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for sinc i
spak against him, I do earnestli rememb him still: therefor my
bowel are troubl for him; I will sure have merci upon him, saith
th lord.

31:21 set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart
toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, o
virgin of israel, turn again to these thi cities.

31:22 how long wilt thou go about, O thou backslid daughter? for
th lord hath creat a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass
a man.

31:23 thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; As yet they
shal use thi speech in the land of judah and in the citi thereof,
when I shall bring again their captivity; the lord bless thee, o
habit of justice, and mountain of holiness.

31:24 and there shall dwell in judah itself, and in all the cities
thereof together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.

31:25 for I have satiat the weari soul, and I have replenish every
sorrow soul.

31:26 upon thi I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep wa sweet unto me.

31:27 behold, the day come, saith the lord, that I will sow the house
of israel and the hous of judah with the seed of man, and with the
se of beast.

31:28 and it shall come to pass, that like as I have watch over
them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to
destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to
plant, saith the lord.

31:29 In those day they shall say no more, the father have eaten a
sour grape, and the children' teeth are set on edge.

31:30 but everi one shall die for hi own iniquity: everi man that
eateth the sour grape, hi teeth shall be set on edge.

31:31 behold, the day come, saith the lord, that I will make a new
coven with the hous of israel, and with the hous of judah: 31:32
not accord to the coven that I made with their father in the
day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of
egypt; which my coven they brake, although I wa an husband unto
them, saith the lord: 31:33 but thi shall be the coven that I will
mak with the hous of israel; after those days, saith the lord, i
wil put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts;
and will be their god, and they shall be my people.

31:34 and they shall teach no more everi man hi neighbour, and every
man hi brother, saying, know the lord: for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the lord: for
i will forgiv their iniquity, and I will rememb their sin no more.

31:35 thu saith the lord, which giveth the sun for a light by day,
and the ordin of the moon and of the star for a light by night,
which divideth the sea when the wave thereof roar; the lord of hosts
i hi name: 31:36 If those ordin depart from befor me, saith
th lord, then the seed of israel also shall ceas from be a nation
befor me for ever.

31:37 thu saith the lord; If heaven abov can be measured, and the
found of the earth search out beneath, I will also cast off
al the seed of israel for all that they have done, saith the lord.

31:38 behold, the day come, saith the lord, that the citi shall be
built to the lord from the tower of hananeel unto the gate of the
corner.

31:39 and the measur line shall yet go forth over against it upon
th hill gareb, and shall compass about to goath.

31:40 and the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and
al the field unto the brook of kidron, unto the corner of the horse
g toward the east, shall be holi unto the lord; it shall not be
pluck up, nor thrown down ani more for ever.

32:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord in the tenth year of
zedekiah king of judah, which wa the eighteenth year of
nebuchadrezzar.

32:2 for then the king of babylon' armi besieg jerusalem: and
jeremiah the prophet wa shut up in the court of the prison, which was
in the king of judah' house.

32:3 for zedekiah king of judah had shut him up, saying, wherefore
dost thou prophesy, and say, thu saith the lord, behold, I will give
thi citi into the hand of the king of babylon, and he shall take it;
32:4 and zedekiah king of judah shall not escap out of the hand of
th chaldeans, but shall sure be deliv into the hand of the king
of babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and hi eyes
shal behold hi eyes; 32:5 and he shall lead zedekiah to babylon, and
ther shall he be until I visit him, saith the lord: though ye fight
with the chaldeans, ye shall not prosper.

32:6 and jeremiah said, the word of the lord came unto me, saying,
32:7 behold, hanameel the son of shallum thine uncl shall come unto
the saying, buy thee my field that is in anathoth: for the right of
redempt is thine to buy it.

32:8 So hanameel mine uncle' son came to me in the court of the
prison accord to the word of the lord, and said unto me, buy my
field, I pray thee, that is in anathoth, which is in the countri of
benjamin: for the right of inherit is thine, and the redempt is
thine; buy it for thyself.

then I knew that thi wa the word of the lord.

32:9 and I bought the field of hanameel my uncle' son, that wa in
anathoth, and weigh him the money, even seventeen shekel of silver.

32:10 and I subscrib the evidence, and seal it, and took
witnesses, and weigh him the money in the balances.

32:11 So I took the evid of the purchase, both that which was
seal accord to the law and custom, and that which wa open: 32:12
and I gave the evid of the purchas unto baruch the son of neriah,
th son of maaseiah, in the sight of hanameel mine uncle' son, and in
th presenc of the wit that subscrib the book of the
purchase, befor all the jew that sat in the court of the prison.

32:13 and I charg baruch befor them, saying, 32:14 thu saith the
lord of hosts, the god of israel; take these evidences, thi evidence
of the purchase, both which is sealed, and thi evid which is
open; and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continu many
days.

32:15 for thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; hous and
field and vineyard shall be possess again in thi land.

32:16 now when I had deliv the evid of the purchas unto
baruch the son of neriah, I pray unto the lord, saying, 32:17 ah
lord god! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thi great
pow and stretch out arm, and there is noth too hard for thee:
32:18 thou shewest lovingkind unto thousands, and recompensest the
iniqu of the father into the bosom of their children after them:
th great, the mighti god, the lord of hosts, is hi name, 32:19 great
in counsel, and mighti in work: for thine eye are open upon all the
way of the son of men: to give everi one accord to hi ways, and
accord to the fruit of hi doings: 32:20 which hast set sign and
wond in the land of egypt, even unto thi day, and in israel, and
among other men; and hast made thee a name, as at thi day; 32:21 and
hast brought forth thi peopl israel out of the land of egypt with
signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched
out arm, and with great terror; 32:22 and hast given them thi land,
which thou didst swear to their father to give them, a land flowing
with milk and honey; 32:23 and they came in, and possess it; but
they obey not thi voice, neither walk in thi law; they have done
noth of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefor thou hast
caus all thi evil to come upon them: 32:24 behold the mounts, they
ar come unto the citi to take it; and the citi is given into the hand
of the chaldeans, that fight against it, becaus of the sword, and of
th famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come
to pass; and, behold, thou seest it.

32:25 and thou hast said unto me, O lord god, buy thee the field for
money, and take witnesses; for the citi is given into the hand of the
chaldeans.

32:26 then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah, saying, 32:27
behold, I am the lord, the god of all flesh: is there ani thing too
hard for me?  32:28 therefor thu saith the lord; behold, I will give
thi citi into the hand of the chaldeans, and into the hand of
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, and he shall take it: 32:29 and the
chaldeans, that fight against thi city, shall come and set fire on
thi city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose roof they have
off incens unto baal, and pour out drink offer unto other
gods, to provok me to anger.

32:30 for the children of israel and the children of judah have only
don evil befor me from their youth: for the children of israel have
onli provok me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the
lord.

32:31 for thi citi hath been to me as a provoc of mine anger and
of my furi from the day that they built it even unto thi day; that i
should remov it from befor my face, 32:32 becaus of all the evil of
th children of israel and of the children of judah, which they have
don to provok me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their
priests, and their prophets, and the men of judah, and the inhabitants
of jerusalem.

32:33 and they have turn unto me the back, and not the face: though
i taught them, rise up earli and teach them, yet they have not
hearken to receiv instruction.

32:34 but they set their abomin in the house, which is call by
mi name, to defil it.

32:35 and they built the high place of baal, which are in the valley
of the son of hinnom, to caus their son and their daughter to pass
through the fire unto molech; which I command them not, neither came
it into my mind, that they should do thi abomination, to caus judah
to sin.

32:36 and now therefor thu saith the lord, the god of israel,
concern thi city, whereof ye say, It shall be deliv into the
hand of the king of babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by
th pestilence; 32:37 behold, I will gather them out of all countries,
whith I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great
wrath; and I will bring them again unto thi place, and I will cause
them to dwell safely: 32:38 and they shall be my people, and I will be
their god: 32:39 and I will give them one heart, and one way, that
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children
aft them: 32:40 and I will make an everlast coven with them,
that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put
mi fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

32:41 yea, I will rejoic over them to do them good, and I will plant
them in thi land assuredli with my whole heart and with my whole
soul.

32:42 for thu saith the lord; like as I have brought all thi great
evil upon thi people, so will I bring upon them all the good that i
hav promis them.

32:43 and field shall be bought in thi land, whereof ye say, It is
desol without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the
chaldeans.

32:44 men shall buy field for money, and subscrib evidences, and
seal them, and take wit in the land of benjamin, and in the
plac about jerusalem, and in the citi of judah, and in the cities
of the mountains, and in the citi of the valley, and in the cities
of the south: for I will caus their captiv to return, saith the
lord.

33:1 moreov the word of the lord came unto jeremiah the second time,
whil he wa yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying, 33:2 thus
saith the lord the maker thereof, the lord that form it, to
establish it; the lord is hi name; 33:3 call unto me, and I will
answ thee, and shew thee great and mighti things, which thou knowest
not.

33:4 for thu saith the lord, the god of israel, concern the houses
of thi city, and concern the hous of the king of judah, which
ar thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword; 33:5 they come to
fight with the chaldeans, but it is to fill them with the dead bodies
of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and for all
whos wicked I have hid my face from thi city.

33:6 behold, I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them,
and will reveal unto them the abund of peac and truth.

33:7 and I will caus the captiv of judah and the captiv of
israel to return, and will build them, as at the first.

33:8 and I will cleans them from all their iniquity, wherebi they
hav sin against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities,
wherebi they have sinned, and wherebi they have transgress against
me.

33:9 and it shall be to me a name of joy, a prais and an honour
befor all the nation of the earth, which shall hear all the good
that I do unto them: and they shall fear and trembl for all the
good and for all the prosper that I procur unto it.

33:10 thu saith the lord; again there shall be heard in thi place,
which ye say shall be desol without man and without beast, even in
th citi of judah, and in the street of jerusalem, that are
desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast,
33:11 the voic of joy, and the voic of gladness, the voic of the
bridegroom, and the voic of the bride, the voic of them that shall
say, prais the lord of hosts: for the lord is good; for hi mercy
endureth for ever: and of them that shall bring the sacrific of
prais into the hous of the lord. for I will caus to return the
capt of the land, as at the first, saith the lord.

33:12 thu saith the lord of hosts; again in thi place, which is
desol without man and without beast, and in all the citi thereof,
shal be an habit of shepherd caus their flock to lie down.

33:13 In the citi of the mountains, in the citi of the vale, and
in the citi of the south, and in the land of benjamin, and in the
plac about jerusalem, and in the citi of judah, shall the flocks
pass again under the hand of him that telleth them, saith the lord.

33:14 behold, the day come, saith the lord, that I will perform that
good thing which I have promis unto the hous of israel and to the
hous of judah.

33:15 In those days, and at that time, will I caus the branch of
right to grow up unto david; and he shall execut judgment and
right in the land.

33:16 In those day shall judah be saved, and jerusalem shall dwell
safely: and thi is the name wherewith she shall be called, the lord
our righteousness.

33:17 for thu saith the lord; david shall never want a man to sit
upon the throne of the hous of israel; 33:18 neither shall the
priest the levit want a man befor me to offer burnt offerings, and
to kindl meat offerings, and to do sacrific continually.

33:19 and the word of the lord came unto jeremiah, saying, 33:20 thus
saith the lord; If ye can break my coven of the day, and my
coven of the night, and that there should not be day and night in
their season; 33:21 then may also my coven be broken with david my
servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon hi throne; and
with the levit the priests, my ministers.

33:22 As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of
th sea measured: so will I multipli the seed of david my servant, and
th levit that minist unto me.

33:23 moreov the word of the lord came to jeremiah, saying, 33:24
considerest thou not what thi peopl have spoken, saying, the two
famili which the lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus
they have despis my people, that they should be no more a nation
befor them.

33:25 thu saith the lord; If my coven be not with day and night,
and if I have not appoint the ordin of heaven and earth; 33:26
then will I cast away the seed of jacob and david my servant, so that
i will not take ani of hi seed to be ruler over the seed of abraham,
isaac, and jacob: for I will caus their captiv to return, and have
merci on them.

34:1 the word which came unto jeremiah from the lord, when
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon, and all hi army, and all the kingdoms
of the earth of hi dominion, and all the people, fought against
jerusalem, and against all the citi thereof, saying, 34:2 thu saith
th lord, the god of israel; Go and speak to zedekiah king of judah,
and tell him, thu saith the lord; behold, I will give thi citi into
th hand of the king of babylon, and he shall burn it with fire: 34:3
and thou shalt not escap out of hi hand, but shalt sure be taken,
and deliv into hi hand; and thine eye shall behold the eye of
th king of babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and
thou shalt go to babylon.

34:4 yet hear the word of the lord, O zedekiah king of judah; thus
saith the lord of thee, thou shalt not die by the sword: 34:5 but thou
shalt die in peace: and with the burn of thi fathers, the former
k which were befor thee, so shall they burn odour for thee; and
they will lament thee, saying, Ah lord! for I have pronounc the
word, saith the lord.

34:6 then jeremiah the prophet spake all these word unto zedekiah
k of judah in jerusalem, 34:7 when the king of babylon' army
fought against jerusalem, and against all the citi of judah that
wer left, against lachish, and against azekah: for these defenced
c remain of the citi of judah.

34:8 thi is the word that came unto jeremiah from the lord, after
that the king zedekiah had made a coven with all the peopl which
wer at jerusalem, to proclaim liberti unto them; 34:9 that everi man
should let hi manservant, and everi man hi maidservant, be an
hebrew or an hebrewess, go free; that none should serv himself of
them, to wit, of a jew hi brother.

34:10 now when all the princes, and all the people, which had entered
into the covenant, heard that everi one should let hi manservant, and
everi one hi maidservant, go free, that none should serv themselves
of them ani more, then they obeyed, and let them go.

34:11 but afterward they turned, and caus the servant and the
handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into
subject for servant and for handmaids.

34:12 therefor the word of the lord came to jeremiah from the lord,
saying, 34:13 thu saith the lord, the god of israel; I made a
coven with your father in the day that I brought them forth out of
th land of egypt, out of the hous of bondmen, saying, 34:14 At the
end of seven year let ye go everi man hi brother an hebrew, which
hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath serv thee six years, thou
shalt let him go free from thee: but your father hearken not unto
me, neither inclin their ear.

34:15 and ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in
proclaim liberti everi man to hi neighbour; and ye had made a
coven befor me in the hous which is call by my name: 34:16 but
y turn and pollut my name, and caus everi man hi servant, and
everi man hi handmaid, whom ye had set at liberti at their pleasure,
to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for
serv and for handmaids.

34:17 therefor thu saith the lord; Ye have not hearken unto me, in
proclaim liberty, everi one to hi brother, and everi man to his
neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberti for you, saith the lord, to
th sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you
to be remov into all the kingdom of the earth.

34:18 and I will give the men that have transgress my covenant,
which have not perform the word of the coven which they had made
befor me, when they cut the calf in twain, and pass between the
part thereof, 34:19 the princ of judah, and the princ of
jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the peopl of the
land, which pass between the part of the calf; 34:20 I will even
g them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them
that seek their life: and their dead bodi shall be for meat unto the
fowl of the heaven, and to the beast of the earth.

34:21 and zedekiah king of judah and hi princ will I give into the
hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life,
and into the hand of the king of babylon' army, which are gone up
from you.

34:22 behold, I will command, saith the lord, and caus them to return
to thi city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn
it with fire: and I will make the citi of judah a desol without
an inhabitant.

35:1 the word which came unto jeremiah from the lord in the day of
jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah, saying, 35:2 Go unto the
hous of the rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the
hous of the lord, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to
drink.

35:3 then I took jaazaniah the son of jeremiah, the son of habaziniah,
and hi brethren, and all hi sons, and the whole hous of the
rechabites; 35:4 and I brought them into the hous of the lord, into
th chamber of the son of hanan, the son of igdaliah, a man of god,
which wa by the chamber of the princes, which wa abov the chamber
of maaseiah the son of shallum, the keeper of the door: 35:5 and I set
befor the son of the hous of the rechabit pot full of wine, and
cups, and I said unto them, drink ye wine.

35:6 but they said, We will drink no wine: for jonadab the son of
rechab our father command us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine,
neith ye, nor your son for ever: 35:7 neither shall ye build house,
nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all your day ye
shal dwell in tents; that ye may live mani day in the land where ye
b strangers.

35:8 thu have we obey the voic of jonadab the son of rechab our
fath in all that he hath charg us, to drink no wine all our days,
we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters; 35:9 nor to build houses
for us to dwell in: neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed:
35:10 but we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according
to all that jonadab our father command us.

35:11 but it came to pass, when nebuchadrezzar king of babylon came up
into the land, that we said, come, and let us go to jerusalem for fear
of the armi of the chaldeans, and for fear of the armi of the syrians:
so we dwell at jerusalem.

35:12 then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah, saying, 35:13 thus
saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; Go and tell the men of
judah and the inhabit of jerusalem, will ye not receive
instruct to hearken to my words? saith the lord.

35:14 the word of jonadab the son of rechab, that he command his
son not to drink wine, are performed; for unto thi day they drink
none, but obey their father' commandment: notwithstand I have
spoken unto you, rise earli and speaking; but ye hearken not unto
me.

35:15 I have sent also unto you all my servant the prophets, rising
up earli and send them, saying, return ye now everi man from his
evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other god to serve
them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to
your fathers: but ye have not inclin your ear, nor hearken unto
me.

35:16 becaus the son of jonadab the son of rechab have perform the
command of their father, which he command them; but thi people
hath not hearken unto me: 35:17 therefor thu saith the lord god of
hosts, the god of israel; behold, I will bring upon judah and upon all
th inhabit of jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced
against them: becaus I have spoken unto them, but they have not
heard; and I have call unto them, but they have not answered.

35:18 and jeremiah said unto the hous of the rechabites, thu saith
th lord of hosts, the god of israel; becaus ye have obey the
command of jonadab your father, and kept all hi precepts, and
don accord unto all that he hath command you: 35:19 therefore
thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; jonadab the son of
rechab shall not want a man to stand befor me for ever.

36:1 and it came to pass in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of
josiah king of judah, that thi word came unto jeremiah from the lord,
saying, 36:2 take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the
word that I have spoken unto thee against israel, and against judah,
and against all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the
day of josiah, even unto thi day.

36:3 It may be that the hous of judah will hear all the evil which i
purpos to do unto them; that they may return everi man from hi evil
way; that I may forgiv their iniqu and their sin.

36:4 then jeremiah call baruch the son of neriah: and baruch wrote
from the mouth of jeremiah all the word of the lord, which he had
spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.

36:5 and jeremiah command baruch, saying, I am shut up; I cannot go
into the hous of the lord: 36:6 therefor go thou, and read in the
roll, which thou hast written from my mouth, the word of the lord in
th ear of the peopl in the lord' hous upon the fast day: and
also thou shalt read them in the ear of all judah that come out of
their cities.

36:7 It may be they will present their supplic befor the lord,
and will return everi one from hi evil way: for great is the anger
and the furi that the lord hath pronounc against thi people.

36:8 and baruch the son of neriah did accord to all that jeremiah
th prophet command him, read in the book the word of the lord
in the lord' house.

36:9 and it came to pass in the fifth year of jehoiakim the son of
josiah king of judah, in the ninth month, that they proclaim a fast
befor the lord to all the peopl in jerusalem, and to all the people
that came from the citi of judah unto jerusalem.

36:10 then read baruch in the book the word of jeremiah in the house
of the lord, in the chamber of gemariah the son of shaphan the scribe,
in the higher court, at the entri of the new gate of the lord' house,
in the ear of all the people.

36:11 when michaiah the son of gemariah, the son of shaphan, had heard
out of the book all the word of the lord, 36:12 then he went down
into the king' house, into the scribe' chamber: and, lo, all the
princ sat there, even elishama the scribe, and delaiah the son of
shemaiah, and elnathan the son of achbor, and gemariah the son of
shaphan, and zedekiah the son of hananiah, and all the princes.

36:13 then michaiah declar unto them all the word that he had
heard, when baruch read the book in the ear of the people.

36:14 therefor all the princ sent jehudi the son of nethaniah, the
son of shelemiah, the son of cushi, unto baruch, saying, take in thine
hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ear of the people, and
come. So baruch the son of neriah took the roll in hi hand, and came
unto them.

36:15 and they said unto him, sit down now, and read it in our ears.
so baruch read it in their ears.

36:16 now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they
wer afraid both one and other, and said unto baruch, We will surely
tel the king of all these words.

36:17 and they ask baruch, saying, tell us now, how didst thou write
al these word at hi mouth?  36:18 then baruch answer them, he
pronounc all these word unto me with hi mouth, and I wrote them
with ink in the book.

36:19 then said the princ unto baruch, go, hide thee, thou and
jeremiah; and let no man know where ye be.

36:20 and they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up
th roll in the chamber of elishama the scribe, and told all the words
in the ear of the king.

36:21 So the king sent jehudi to fetch the roll: and he took it out of
elishama the scribe' chamber. and jehudi read it in the ear of the
king, and in the ear of all the princ which stood besid the king.

36:22 now the king sat in the winterhous in the ninth month: and
ther wa a fire on the hearth burn befor him.

36:23 and it came to pass, that when jehudi had read three or four
leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that
wa on the hearth, until all the roll wa consum in the fire that
wa on the hearth.

36:24 yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the
king, nor ani of hi servant that heard all these words.

36:25 nevertheless elnathan and delaiah and gemariah had made
intercess to the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would
not hear them.

36:26 but the king command jerahmeel the son of hammelech, and
seraiah the son of azriel, and shelemiah the son of abdeel, to take
baruch the scribe and jeremiah the prophet: but the lord hid them.

36:27 then the word of the lord came to jeremiah, after that the king
had burn the roll, and the word which baruch wrote at the mouth of
jeremiah, saying, 36:28 take thee again anoth roll, and write in it
al the former word that were in the first roll, which jehoiakim the
k of judah hath burned.

36:29 and thou shalt say to jehoiakim king of judah, thu saith the
lord; thou hast burn thi roll, saying, whi hast thou written
therein, saying, the king of babylon shall certainli come and destroy
thi land, and shall caus to ceas from thenc man and beast?  36:30
therefor thu saith the lord of jehoiakim king of judah; He shall
hav none to sit upon the throne of david: and hi dead bodi shall be
cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.

36:31 and I will punish him and hi seed and hi servant for their
iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabit of
jerusalem, and upon the men of judah, all the evil that I have
pronounc against them; but they hearken not.

36:32 then took jeremiah anoth roll, and gave it to baruch the
scribe, the son of neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of
jeremiah all the word of the book which jehoiakim king of judah had
burn in the fire: and there were ad besid unto them mani like
words.

37:1 and king zedekiah the son of josiah reign instead of coniah the
son of jehoiakim, whom nebuchadrezzar king of babylon made king in the
land of judah.

37:2 but neither he, nor hi servants, nor the peopl of the land, did
hearken unto the word of the lord, which he spake by the prophet
jeremiah.

37:3 and zedekiah the king sent jehuc the son of shelemiah and
zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest to the prophet jeremiah,
saying, pray now unto the lord our god for us.

37:4 now jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had
not put him into prison.

37:5 then pharaoh' armi wa come forth out of egypt: and when the
chaldean that besieg jerusalem heard tide of them, they departed
from jerusalem.

37:6 then came the word of the lord unto the prophet jeremiah saying,
37:7 thu saith the lord, the god of israel; thu shall ye say to the
k of judah, that sent you unto me to enquir of me; behold,
pharaoh' army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to egypt
into their own land.

37:8 and the chaldean shall come again, and fight against thi city,
and take it, and burn it with fire.

37:9 thu saith the lord; deceiv not yourselves, saying, the
chaldean shall sure depart from us: for they shall not depart.

37:10 for though ye had smitten the whole armi of the chaldean that
fight against you, and there remain but wound men among them, yet
should they rise up everi man in hi tent, and burn thi citi with
fire.

37:11 and it came to pass, that when the armi of the chaldean was
broken up from jerusalem for fear of pharaoh' army, 37:12 then
jeremiah went forth out of jerusalem to go into the land of benjamin,
to separ himself thenc in the midst of the people.

37:13 and when he wa in the gate of benjamin, a captain of the ward
wa there, whose name wa irijah, the son of shelemiah, the son of
hananiah; and he took jeremiah the prophet, saying, thou fallest away
to the chaldeans.

37:14 then said jeremiah, It is false; I fall not away to the
chaldeans.

but he hearken not to him: so irijah took jeremiah, and brought him
to the princes.

37:15 wherefor the princ were wroth with jeremiah, and smote him,
and put him in prison in the hous of jonathan the scribe: for they
had made that the prison.

37:16 when jeremiah wa enter into the dungeon, and into the cabins,
and jeremiah had remain there mani days; 37:17 then zedekiah the
k sent, and took him out: and the king ask him secretli in his
house, and said, Is there ani word from the lord? and jeremiah said,
ther is: for, said he, thou shalt be deliv into the hand of the
k of babylon.

37:18 moreov jeremiah said unto king zedekiah, what have I offended
against thee, or against thi servants, or against thi people, that ye
hav put me in prison?  37:19 where are now your prophet which
prophesi unto you, saying, the king of babylon shall not come
against you, nor against thi land?  37:20 therefor hear now, I pray
thee, O my lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be
accept befor thee; that thou caus me not to return to the hous of
jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.

37:21 then zedekiah the king command that they should commit
jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him
daili a piec of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread
in the citi were spent.

thu jeremiah remain in the court of the prison.

38:1 then shephatiah the son of mattan, and gedaliah the son of
pashur, and jucal the son of shelemiah, and pashur the son of
malchiah, heard the word that jeremiah had spoken unto all the
people, saying, 38:2 thu saith the lord, He that remaineth in this
citi shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but
h that goeth forth to the chaldean shall live; for he shall have his
lif for a prey, and shall live.

38:3 thu saith the lord, thi citi shall sure be given into the
hand of the king of babylon' army, which shall take it.

38:4 therefor the princ said unto the king, We beseech thee, let
thi man be put to death: for thu he weakeneth the hand of the men
of war that remain in thi city, and the hand of all the people, in
speak such word unto them: for thi man seeketh not the welfar of
thi people, but the hurt.

38:5 then zedekiah the king said, behold, he is in your hand: for the
k is not he that can do ani thing against you.

38:6 then took they jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of
malchiah the son of hammelech, that wa in the court of the prison:
and they let down jeremiah with cords. and in the dungeon there wa no
water, but mire: so jeremiah sunk in the mire.

38:7 now when ebedmelech the ethiopian, one of the eunuch which was
in the king' house, heard that they had put jeremiah in the dungeon;
th king then sit in the gate of benjamin; 38:8 ebedmelech went
forth out of the king' house, and spake to the king saying, 38:9 my
lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to
jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is
lik to die for hunger in the place where he is: for there is no more
bread in the city.

38:10 then the king command ebedmelech the ethiopian, saying, take
from henc thirti men with thee, and take up jeremiah the prophet out
of the dungeon, befor he die.

38:11 So ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the hous of
th king under the treasury, and took thenc old cast clout and old
rotten rags, and let them down by cord into the dungeon to jeremiah.

38:12 and ebedmelech the ethiopian said unto jeremiah, put now these
old cast clout and rotten rag under thine armhol under the cords.
and jeremiah did so.

38:13 So they drew up jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the
dungeon: and jeremiah remain in the court of the prison.

38:14 then zedekiah the king sent, and took jeremiah the prophet unto
him into the third entri that is in the hous of the lord: and the
k said unto jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide noth from
me.

38:15 then jeremiah said unto zedekiah, If I declar it unto thee,
wilt thou not sure put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt
thou not hearken unto me?  38:16 So zedekiah the king sware secretly
unto jeremiah, saying, As the lord liveth, that made us thi soul, i
wil not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of
thes men that seek thi life.

38:17 then said jeremiah unto zedekiah, thu saith the lord, the god
of hosts, the god of israel; If thou wilt assuredli go forth unto the
k of babylon' princes, then thi soul shall live, and thi city
shal not be burn with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house:
38:18 but if thou wilt not go forth to the king of babylon' princes,
then shall thi citi be given into the hand of the chaldeans, and they
shal burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escap out of their hand.

38:19 and zedekiah the king said unto jeremiah, I am afraid of the
jew that are fallen to the chaldeans, lest they deliv me into their
hand, and they mock me.

38:20 but jeremiah said, they shall not deliv thee. obey, I beseech
thee, the voic of the lord, which I speak unto thee: so it shall be
wel unto thee, and thi soul shall live.

38:21 but if thou refus to go forth, thi is the word that the lord
hath shew me: 38:22 and, behold, all the women that are left in the
k of judah' hous shall be brought forth to the king of babylon's
princes, and those women shall say, thi friend have set thee on, and
hav prevail against thee: thi feet are sunk in the mire, and they
ar turn away back.

38:23 So they shall bring out all thi wive and thi children to the
chaldeans: and thou shalt not escap out of their hand, but shalt be
taken by the hand of the king of babylon: and thou shalt caus this
citi to be burn with fire.

38:24 then said zedekiah unto jeremiah, let no man know of these
words, and thou shalt not die.

38:25 but if the princ hear that I have talk with thee, and they
com unto thee, and say unto thee, declar unto us now what thou hast
said unto the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to
death; also what the king said unto thee: 38:26 then thou shalt say
unto them, I present my supplic befor the king, that he would
not caus me to return to jonathan' house, to die there.

38:27 then came all the princ unto jeremiah, and ask him: and he
told them accord to all these word that the king had commanded. so
they left off speak with him; for the matter wa not perceived.

38:28 So jeremiah abod in the court of the prison until the day that
jerusalem wa taken: and he wa there when jerusalem wa taken.

39:1 In the ninth year of zedekiah king of judah, in the tenth month,
cam nebuchadrezzar king of babylon and all hi armi against
jerusalem, and they besieg it.

39:2 and in the eleventh year of zedekiah, in the fourth month, the
ninth day of the month, the citi wa broken up.

39:3 and all the princ of the king of babylon came in, and sat in
th middl gate, even nergalsharezer, samgarnebo, sarsechim, rabsaris,
nergalsharezer, rabmag, with all the residu of the princ of the
k of babylon.

39:4 and it came to pass, that when zedekiah the king of judah saw
them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of
th citi by night, by the way of the king' garden, by the gate
betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain.

39:5 but the chaldeans' armi pursu after them, and overtook zedekiah
in the plain of jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought
him up to nebuchadnezzar king of babylon to riblah in the land of
hamath, where he gave judgment upon him.

39:6 then the king of babylon slew the son of zedekiah in riblah
befor hi eyes: also the king of babylon slew all the nobl of
judah.

39:7 moreov he put out zedekiah' eyes, and bound him with chains,
to carri him to babylon.

39:8 and the chaldean burn the king' house, and the hous of the
people, with fire, and brake down the wall of jerusalem.

39:9 then nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carri away captive
into babylon the remnant of the peopl that remain in the city, and
thos that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the people
that remained.

39:10 but nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the
people, which had nothing, in the land of judah, and gave them
vineyard and field at the same time.

39:11 now nebuchadrezzar king of babylon gave charg concerning
jeremiah to nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying, 39:12 take
him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as
h shall say unto thee.

39:13 So nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and nebushasban,
rabsaris, and nergalsharezer, rabmag, and all the king of babylon's
princes; 39:14 even they sent, and took jeremiah out of the court of
th prison, and commit him unto gedaliah the son of ahikam the son
of shaphan, that he should carri him home: so he dwelt among the
people.

39:15 now the word of the lord came unto jeremiah, while he wa shut
up in the court of the prison, saying, 39:16 Go and speak to
ebedmelech the ethiopian, saying, thu saith the lord of hosts, the
god of israel; behold, I will bring my word upon thi citi for evil,
and not for good; and they shall be accomplish in that day before
thee.

39:17 but I will deliv thee in that day, saith the lord: and thou
shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.

39:18 for I will sure deliv thee, and thou shalt not fall by the
sword, but thi life shall be for a prey unto thee: becaus thou hast
put thi trust in me, saith the lord.

40:1 the word that came to jeremiah from the lord, after that
nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from ramah, when
h had taken him be bound in chain among all that were carried
away captiv of jerusalem and judah, which were carri away captive
unto babylon.

40:2 and the captain of the guard took jeremiah, and said unto him,
th lord thi god hath pronounc thi evil upon thi place.

40:3 now the lord hath brought it, and done accord as he hath said:
becaus ye have sin against the lord, and have not obey his
voice, therefor thi thing is come upon you.

40:4 and now, behold, I loos thee thi day from the chain which were
upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into
babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto
the to come with me into babylon, forbear: behold, all the land is
befor thee: whither it seemeth good and conveni for thee to go,
thith go.

40:5 now while he wa not yet gone back, he said, Go back also to
gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan, whom the king of
babylon hath made governor over the citi of judah, and dwell with
him among the people: or go wheresoev it seemeth conveni unto
the to go. So the captain of the guard gave him victual and a
reward, and let him go.

40:6 then went jeremiah unto gedaliah the son of ahikam to mizpah; and
dwelt with him among the peopl that were left in the land.

40:7 now when all the captain of the forc which were in the fields,
even they and their men, heard that the king of babylon had made
gedaliah the son of ahikam governor in the land, and had committed
unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the land, of
them that were not carri away captiv to babylon; 40:8 then they
cam to gedaliah to mizpah, even ishmael the son of nethaniah, and
johanan and jonathan the son of kareah, and seraiah the son of
tanhumeth, and the son of ephai the netophathite, and jezaniah the
son of a maachathite, they and their men.

40:9 and gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan sware unto them
and to their men, saying, fear not to serv the chaldeans: dwell in
th land, and serv the king of babylon, and it shall be well with
you.

40:10 As for me, behold, I will dwell at mizpah, to serv the
chaldeans, which will come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer
fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your
citi that ye have taken.

40:11 likewis when all the jew that were in moab, and among the
ammonites, and in edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that
th king of babylon had left a remnant of judah, and that he had set
ov them gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan; 40:12 even
al the jew return out of all place whither they were driven, and
cam to the land of judah, to gedaliah, unto mizpah, and gather wine
and summer fruit veri much.

40:13 moreov johanan the son of kareah, and all the captain of the
forc that were in the fields, came to gedaliah to mizpah, 40:14 and
said unto him, dost thou certainli know that baali the king of the
ammonit hath sent ishmael the son of nethaniah to slay thee? but
gedaliah the son of ahikam believ them not.

40:15 then johanan the son of kareah spake to gedaliah in mizpah
secretli saying, let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay ishmael the
son of nethaniah, and no man shall know it: wherefor should he slay
thee, that all the jew which are gather unto thee should be
scattered, and the remnant in judah perish?  40:16 but gedaliah the
son of ahikam said unto johanan the son of kareah, thou shalt not do
thi thing: for thou speakest fals of ishmael.

41:1 now it came to pass in the seventh month, that ishmael the son of
nethaniah the son of elishama, of the seed royal, and the princ of
th king, even ten men with him, came unto gedaliah the son of ahikam
to mizpah; and there they did eat bread togeth in mizpah.

41:2 then aros ishmael the son of nethaniah, and the ten men that
wer with him, and smote gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan
with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of babylon had made
governor over the land.

41:3 ishmael also slew all the jew that were with him, even with
gedaliah, at mizpah, and the chaldean that were found there, and the
men of war.

41:4 and it came to pass the second day after he had slain gedaliah,
and no man knew it, 41:5 that there came certain from shechem, from
shiloh, and from samaria, even fourscor men, have their beards
shaven, and their cloth rent, and have cut themselves, with
off and incens in their hand, to bring them to the hous of the
lord.

41:6 and ishmael the son of nethaniah went forth from mizpah to meet
them, weep all along as he went: and it came to pass, as he met
them, he said unto them, come to gedaliah the son of ahikam.

41:7 and it wa so, when they came into the midst of the city, that
ishmael the son of nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst
of the pit, he, and the men that were with him.

41:8 but ten men were found among them that said unto ishmael, slay us
not: for we have treasur in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and
of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their
brethren.

41:9 now the pit wherein ishmael had cast all the dead bodi of the
men, whom he had slain becaus of gedaliah, wa it which asa the king
had made for fear of baasha king of israel: and ishmael the son of
nethaniah fill it with them that were slain.

41:10 then ishmael carri away captiv all the residu of the people
that were in mizpah, even the king' daughters, and all the people
that remain in mizpah, whom nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had
commit to gedaliah the son of ahikam: and ishmael the son of
nethaniah carri them away captive, and depart to go over to the
ammonites.

41:11 but when johanan the son of kareah, and all the captain of the
forc that were with him, heard of all the evil that ishmael the son
of nethaniah had done, 41:12 then they took all the men, and went to
fight with ishmael the son of nethaniah, and found him by the great
wat that are in gibeon.

41:13 now it came to pass, that when all the peopl which were with
ishmael saw johanan the son of kareah, and all the captain of the
forc that were with him, then they were glad.

41:14 So all the peopl that ishmael had carri away captiv from
mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto johanan the son of
kareah.

41:15 but ishmael the son of nethaniah escap from johanan with eight
men, and went to the ammonites.

41:16 then took johanan the son of kareah, and all the captain of the
forc that were with him, all the remnant of the peopl whom he had
recov from ishmael the son of nethaniah, from mizpah, after that
h had slain gedaliah the son of ahikam, even mighti men of war, and
th women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought
again from gibeon: 41:17 and they departed, and dwelt in the
habit of chimham, which is by bethlehem, to go to enter into
egypt, 41:18 becaus of the chaldeans: for they were afraid of them,
becaus ishmael the son of nethaniah had slain gedaliah the son of
ahikam, whom the king of babylon made governor in the land.

42:1 then all the captain of the forces, and johanan the son of
kareah, and jezaniah the son of hoshaiah, and all the peopl from the
least even unto the greatest, came near, 42:2 and said unto jeremiah
th prophet, let, we beseech thee, our supplic be accept before
thee, and pray for us unto the lord thi god, even for all this
remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as thine eye do behold
us:) 42:3 that the lord thi god may shew us the way wherein we may
walk, and the thing that we may do.

42:4 then jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you;
behold, I will pray unto the lord your god accord to your words;
and it shall come to pass, that whatsoev thing the lord shall answer
you, I will declar it unto you; I will keep noth back from you.

42:5 then they said to jeremiah, the lord be a true and faithful
wit between us, if we do not even accord to all thing for the
which the lord thi god shall send thee to us.

42:6 whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice
of the lord our god, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with
us, when we obey the voic of the lord our god.

42:7 and it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the lord
cam unto jeremiah.

42:8 then call he johanan the son of kareah, and all the captain of
th forc which were with him, and all the peopl from the least even
to the greatest, 42:9 and said unto them, thu saith the lord, the god
of israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your supplic before
him; 42:10 If ye will still abid in thi land, then will I build you,
and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up: for
i repent me of the evil that I have done unto you.

42:11 Be not afraid of the king of babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be
not afraid of him, saith the lord: for I am with you to save you, and
to deliv you from hi hand.

42:12 and I will shew merci unto you, that he may have merci upon
you, and caus you to return to your own land.

42:13 but if ye say, We will not dwell in thi land, neither obey the
voic of the lord your god, 42:14 saying, no; but we will go into the
land of egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell: 42:15 and
now therefor hear the word of the lord, ye remnant of judah; thus
saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; If ye wholli set your
fac to enter into egypt, and go to sojourn there; 42:16 then it
shal come to pass, that the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake
y there in the land of egypt, and the famine, whereof ye were
afraid, shall follow close after you there in egypt; and there ye
shal die.

42:17 So shall it be with all the men that set their face to go into
egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine,
and by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escap from
th evil that I will bring upon them.

42:18 for thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; As mine
ang and my furi hath been pour forth upon the inhabit of
jerusalem; so shall my furi be pour forth upon you, when ye shall
ent into egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment,
and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see thi place no more.

42:19 the lord hath said concern you, O ye remnant of judah; Go ye
not into egypt: know certainli that I have admonish you thi day.

42:20 for ye dissembl in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the lord
your god, saying, pray for us unto the lord our god; and according
unto all that the lord our god shall say, so declar unto us, and we
wil do it.

42:21 and now I have thi day declar it to you; but ye have not
obey the voic of the lord your god, nor ani thing for the which he
hath sent me unto you.

42:22 now therefor know certainli that ye shall die by the sword, by
th famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desir to
go and to sojourn.

43:1 and it came to pass, that when jeremiah had made an end of
speak unto all the peopl all the word of the lord their god, for
which the lord their god had sent him to them, even all these words,
43:2 then spake azariah the son of hoshaiah, and johanan the son of
kareah, and all the proud men, say unto jeremiah, thou speakest
falsely: the lord our god hath not sent thee to say, Go not into egypt
to sojourn there: 43:3 but baruch the son of neriah setteth thee on
against us, for to deliv us into the hand of the chaldeans, that
they might put us to death, and carri us away captiv into babylon.

43:4 So johanan the son of kareah, and all the captain of the forces,
and all the people, obey not the voic of the lord, to dwell in the
land of judah.

43:5 but johanan the son of kareah, and all the captain of the
forces, took all the remnant of judah, that were return from all
nations, whither they had been driven, to dwell in the land of judah;
43:6 even men, and women, and children, and the king' daughters, and
everi person that nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with
gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan, and jeremiah the
prophet, and baruch the son of neriah.

43:7 So they came into the land of egypt: for they obey not the
voic of the lord: thu came they even to tahpanhes.

43:8 then came the word of the lord unto jeremiah in tahpanhes,
saying, 43:9 take great stone in thine hand, and hide them in the
clay in the brickkiln, which is at the entri of pharaoh' hous in
tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of judah; 43:10 and say unto them,
thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; behold, I will send
and take nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon, my servant, and will set
hi throne upon these stone that I have hid; and he shall spread his
roy pavilion over them.

43:11 and when he cometh, he shall smite the land of egypt, and
deliv such as are for death to death; and such as are for captivity
to captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword.

43:12 and I will kindl a fire in the hous of the god of egypt; and
h shall burn them, and carri them away captives: and he shall array
himself with the land of egypt, as a shepherd putteth on hi garment;
and he shall go forth from thenc in peace.

43:13 He shall break also the imag of bethshemesh, that is in the
land of egypt; and the hous of the god of the egyptian shall he
burn with fire.

44:1 the word that came to jeremiah concern all the jew which
dwel in the land of egypt, which dwell at migdol, and at tahpanhes,
and at noph, and in the countri of pathros, saying, 44:2 thu saith
th lord of hosts, the god of israel; Ye have seen all the evil that i
hav brought upon jerusalem, and upon all the citi of judah; and,
behold, thi day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein,
44:3 becaus of their wicked which they have commit to provoke
m to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serv other
gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers.

44:4 howbeit I sent unto you all my servant the prophets, rising
earli and send them, saying, oh, do not thi abomin thing that
i hate.

44:5 but they hearken not, nor inclin their ear to turn from their
wickedness, to burn no incens unto other gods.

44:6 wherefor my furi and mine anger wa pour forth, and was
kindl in the citi of judah and in the street of jerusalem; and
they are wast and desolate, as at thi day.

44:7 therefor now thu saith the lord, the god of hosts, the god of
israel; wherefor commit ye thi great evil against your souls, to cut
off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of judah, to leave
y none to remain; 44:8 In that ye provok me unto wrath with the
work of your hands, burn incens unto other god in the land of
egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselv off,
and that ye might be a curs and a reproach among all the nation of
th earth?  44:9 have ye forgotten the wicked of your fathers, and
th wicked of the king of judah, and the wicked of their
wives, and your own wickedness, and the wicked of your wives,
which they have commit in the land of judah, and in the street of
jerusalem?  44:10 they are not humbl even unto thi day, neither
hav they feared, nor walk in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set
befor you and befor your fathers.

44:11 therefor thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel;
behold, I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all
judah.

44:12 and I will take the remnant of judah, that have set their faces
to go into the land of egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be
consumed, and fall in the land of egypt; they shall even be consumed
bi the sword and by the famine: they shall die, from the least even
unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be
an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.

44:13 for I will punish them that dwell in the land of egypt, as i
hav punish jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence: 44:14 So that none of the remnant of judah, which are gone
into the land of egypt to sojourn there, shall escap or remain, that
they should return into the land of judah, to the which they have a
desir to return to dwell there: for none shall return but such as
shal escape.

44:15 then all the men which knew that their wive had burn incense
unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude,
even all the peopl that dwelt in the land of egypt, in pathros,
answ jeremiah, saying, 44:16 As for the word that thou hast spoken
unto us in the name of the lord, we will not hearken unto thee.

44:17 but we will certainli do whatsoev thing goeth forth out of our
own mouth, to burn incens unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offer unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our
kings, and our princes, in the citi of judah, and in the street of
jerusalem: for then had we plenti of victuals, and were well, and saw
no evil.

44:18 but sinc we left off to burn incens to the queen of heaven,
and to pour out drink offer unto her, we have want all things,
and have been consum by the sword and by the famine.

44:19 and when we burn incens to the queen of heaven, and poured
out drink offer unto her, did we make her cake to worship her,
and pour out drink offer unto her, without our men?  44:20 then
jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women, and
to all the peopl which had given him that answer, saying, 44:21 the
incens that ye burn in the citi of judah, and in the street of
jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the
peopl of the land, did not the lord rememb them, and came it not
into hi mind?  44:22 So that the lord could no longer bear, because
of the evil of your doings, and becaus of the abomin which ye
hav committed; therefor is your land a desolation, and an
astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at thi day.

44:23 becaus ye have burn incense, and becaus ye have sinned
against the lord, and have not obey the voic of the lord, nor
walk in hi law, nor in hi statutes, nor in hi testimonies;
therefor thi evil is happen unto you, as at thi day.

44:24 moreov jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the
women, hear the word of the lord, all judah that are in the land of
egypt: 44:25 thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel, saying;
y and your wive have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled
with your hand, saying, We will sure perform our vow that we have
vowed, to burn incens to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
off unto her: ye will sure accomplish your vows, and surely
perform your vows.

44:26 therefor hear ye the word of the lord, all judah that dwell in
th land of egypt; behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the
lord, that my name shall no more be name in the mouth of ani man of
judah in all the land of egypt, saying, the lord god liveth.

44:27 behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and
al the men of judah that are in the land of egypt shall be consumed
bi the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them.

44:28 yet a small number that escap the sword shall return out of the
land of egypt into the land of judah, and all the remnant of judah,
that are gone into the land of egypt to sojourn there, shall know
whos word shall stand, mine, or their's.

44:29 and thi shall be a sign unto you, saith the lord, that I will
punish you in thi place, that ye may know that my word shall surely
stand against you for evil: 44:30 thu saith the lord; behold, I will
giv pharaohhophra king of egypt into the hand of hi enemies, and
into the hand of them that seek hi life; as I gave zedekiah king of
judah into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, hi enemy, and
that sought hi life.

45:1 the word that jeremiah the prophet spake unto baruch the son of
neriah, when he had written these word in a book at the mouth of
jeremiah, in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of
judah, saying, 45:2 thu saith the lord, the god of israel, unto thee,
o baruch: 45:3 thou didst say, woe is me now! for the lord hath added
grief to my sorrow; I faint in my sighing, and I find no rest.

45:4 thu shalt thou say unto him, the lord saith thus; behold, that
which I have built will I break down, and that which I have plant i
wil pluck up, even thi whole land.

45:5 and seekest thou great thing for thyself? seek them not: for,
behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the lord: but thi life
wil I give unto thee for a prey in all place whither thou goest.

46:1 the word of the lord which came to jeremiah the prophet against
th gentiles; 46:2 against egypt, against the armi of pharaohnecho
k of egypt, which wa by the river euphrat in carchemish, which
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon smote in the fourth year of jehoiakim
th son of josiah king of judah.

46:3 order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle.

46:4 har the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with
your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines.

46:5 wherefor have I seen them dismay and turn away back? and
their mighti one are beaten down, and are fled apace, and look not
back: for fear wa round about, saith the lord.

46:6 let not the swift flee away, nor the mighti man escape; they
shal stumble, and fall toward the north by the river euphrates.

46:7 who is thi that cometh up as a flood, whose water are move as
th rivers?  46:8 egypt riseth up like a flood, and hi water are
mov like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up, and will cover the
earth; I will destroy the citi and the inhabit thereof.

46:9 come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighti men
com forth; the ethiopian and the libyans, that handl the shield;
and the lydians, that handl and bend the bow.

46:10 for thi is the day of the lord god of hosts, a day of
vengeance, that he may aveng him of hi adversaries: and the sword
shal devour, and it shall be satiat and made drunk with their blood:
for the lord god of host hath a sacrific in the north countri by the
riv euphrates.

46:11 Go up into gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of
egypt: in vain shalt thou use mani medicines; for thou shalt not be
cured.

46:12 the nation have heard of thi shame, and thi cri hath fill the
land: for the mighti man hath stumbl against the mighty, and they
ar fallen both together.

46:13 the word that the lord spake to jeremiah the prophet, how
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon should come and smite the land of
egypt.

46:14 declar ye in egypt, and publish in migdol, and publish in noph
and in tahpanhes: say ye, stand fast, and prepar thee; for the sword
shal devour round about thee.

46:15 whi are thi valiant men swept away? they stood not, becaus the
lord did drive them.

46:16 He made mani to fall, yea, one fell upon another: and they said,
arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our
nativity, from the oppress sword.

46:17 they did cri there, pharaoh king of egypt is but a noise; he
hath pass the time appointed.

46:18 As I live, saith the king, whose name is the lord of hosts,
sur as tabor is among the mountains, and as carmel by the sea, so
shal he come.

46:19 O thou daughter dwell in egypt, furnish thyself to go into
captivity: for noph shall be wast and desol without an inhabitant.

46:20 egypt is like a veri fair heifer, but destruct cometh; it
cometh out of the north.

46:21 also her hire men are in the midst of her like fat bullocks;
for they also are turn back, and are fled away together: they did
not stand, becaus the day of their calam wa come upon them, and
th time of their visitation.

46:22 the voic thereof shall go like a serpent; for they shall march
with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewer of wood.

46:23 they shall cut down her forest, saith the lord, though it cannot
b searched; becaus they are more than the grasshoppers, and are
innumerable.

46:24 the daughter of egypt shall be confounded; she shall be
deliv into the hand of the peopl of the north.

46:25 the lord of hosts, the god of israel, saith; behold, I will
punish the multitud of no, and pharaoh, and egypt, with their gods,
and their kings; even pharaoh, and all them that trust in him: 46:26
and I will deliv them into the hand of those that seek their lives,
and into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, and into the hand
of hi servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days
of old, saith the lord.

46:27 but fear not thou, O my servant jacob, and be not dismayed, o
israel: for, behold, I will save thee from afar off, and thi seed from
th land of their captivity; and jacob shall return, and be in rest
and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.

46:28 fear thou not, O jacob my servant, saith the lord: for I am with
thee; for I will make a full end of all the nation whither I have
driven thee: but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee
in measure; yet will I not leav thee wholli unpunished.

47:1 the word of the lord that came to jeremiah the prophet against
th philistines, befor that pharaoh smote gaza.

47:2 thu saith the lord; behold, water rise up out of the north, and
shal be an overflow flood, and shall overflow the land, and all
that is therein; the city, and them that dwell therein: then the men
shal cry, and all the inhabit of the land shall howl.

47:3 At the nois of the stamp of the hoof of hi strong horses,
at the rush of hi chariots, and at the rumbl of hi wheels, the
fath shall not look back to their children for feebl of hands;
47:4 becaus of the day that cometh to spoil all the philistines, and
to cut off from tyru and zidon everi helper that remaineth: for the
lord will spoil the philistines, the remnant of the countri of
caphtor.

47:5 bald is come upon gaza; ashkelon is cut off with the remnant
of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?  47:6 O thou sword of
th lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into
thi scabbard, rest, and be still.

47:7 how can it be quiet, see the lord hath given it a charge
against ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he appointed
it.

48:1 against moab thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; woe
unto nebo! for it is spoiled: kiriathaim is confound and taken:
misgab is confound and dismayed.

48:2 there shall be no more prais of moab: in heshbon they have
devis evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from be a
nation. also thou shalt be cut down, O madmen; the sword shall pursue
thee.

48:3 A voic of cri shall be from horonaim, spoil and great
destruction.

48:4 moab is destroyed; her littl one have caus a cri to be heard.

48:5 for in the go up of luhith continu weep shall go up; for
in the go down of horonaim the enemi have heard a cri of
destruction.

48:6 flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.

48:7 for becaus thou hast trust in thi work and in thi treasures,
th shalt also be taken: and chemosh shall go forth into captivity
with hi priest and hi princ together.

48:8 and the spoiler shall come upon everi city, and no citi shall
escape: the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be
destroyed, as the lord hath spoken.

48:9 give wing unto moab, that it may flee and get away: for the
citi thereof shall be desolate, without ani to dwell therein.

48:10 curs be he that doeth the work of the lord deceitfully, and
curs be he that keepeth back hi sword from blood.

48:11 moab hath been at eas from hi youth, and he hath settl on
hi lees, and hath not been empti from vessel to vessel, neither
hath he gone into captivity: therefor hi tast remain in him, and
hi scent is not changed.

48:12 therefore, behold, the day come, saith the lord, that I will
send unto him wanderers, that shall caus him to wander, and shall
empti hi vessels, and break their bottles.

48:13 and moab shall be asham of chemosh, as the hous of israel was
asham of bethel their confidence.

48:14 how say ye, We are mighti and strong men for the war?  48:15
moab is spoiled, and gone up out of her cities, and hi chosen young
men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the king, whose name is the
lord of hosts.

48:16 the calam of moab is near to come, and hi afflict hasteth
fast.

48:17 all ye that are about him, bemoan him; and all ye that know his
name, say, how is the strong staff broken, and the beauti rod!
48:18 thou daughter that dost inhabit dibon, come down from thi glory,
and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of moab shall come upon thee, and
h shall destroy thi strong holds.

48:19 O inhabit of aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that
fleeth, and her that escapeth, and say, what is done?  48:20 moab is
confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; tell ye it in arnon,
that moab is spoiled, 48:21 and judgment is come upon the plain
country; upon holon, and upon jahazah, and upon mephaath, 48:22 and
upon dibon, and upon nebo, and upon bethdiblathaim, 48:23 and upon
kiriathaim, and upon bethgamul, and upon bethmeon, 48:24 and upon
kerioth, and upon bozrah, and upon all the citi of the land of moab,
far or near.

48:25 the horn of moab is cut off, and hi arm is broken, saith the
lord.

48:26 make ye him drunken: for he magnifi himself against the lord:
moab also shall wallow in hi vomit, and he also shall be in derision.

48:27 for wa not israel a deris unto thee? wa he found among
thieves?  for sinc thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.

48:28 O ye that dwell in moab, leav the cities, and dwell in the
rock, and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the side of the
hole' mouth.

48:29 We have heard the pride of moab, (he is exceed proud) his
loftiness, and hi arrogancy, and hi pride, and the haughti of
hi heart.

48:30 I know hi wrath, saith the lord; but it shall not be so; his
li shall not so effect it.

48:31 therefor will I howl for moab, and I will cri out for all moab;
min heart shall mourn for the men of kirheres.

48:32 O vine of sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weep of
jazer: thi plant are gone over the sea, they reach even to the sea of
jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon thi summer fruit and upon thy
vintage.

48:33 and joy and glad is taken from the plenti field, and from
th land of moab, and I have caus wine to fail from the winepresses:
non shall tread with shouting; their shout shall be no shouting.

48:34 from the cri of heshbon even unto elealeh, and even unto jahaz,
hav they utter their voice, from zoar even unto horonaim, as an
heif of three year old: for the water also of nimrim shall be
desolate.

48:35 moreov I will caus to ceas in moab, saith the lord, him that
offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incens to hi gods.

48:36 therefor mine heart shall sound for moab like pipes, and mine
heart shall sound like pipe for the men of kirheres: becaus the
rich that he hath gotten are perished.

48:37 for everi head shall be bald, and everi beard clipped: upon all
th hand shall be cuttings, and upon the loin sackcloth.

48:38 there shall be lament gener upon all the housetop of
moab, and in the street thereof: for I have broken moab like a vessel
wherein is no pleasure, saith the lord.

48:39 they shall howl, saying, how is it broken down! how hath moab
turn the back with shame! so shall moab be a deris and a
dismay to all them about him.

48:40 for thu saith the lord; behold, he shall fli as an eagle, and
shal spread hi wing over moab.

48:41 kerioth is taken, and the strong hold are surprised, and the
mighti men' heart in moab at that day shall be as the heart of a
woman in her pangs.

48:42 and moab shall be destroy from be a people, becaus he hath
magnifi himself against the lord.

48:43 fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon thee, o
inhabit of moab, saith the lord.

48:44 He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he
that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will
br upon it, even upon moab, the year of their visitation, saith the
lord.

48:45 they that fled stood under the shadow of heshbon becaus of the
force: but a fire shall come forth out of heshbon, and a flame from
th midst of sihon, and shall devour the corner of moab, and the crown
of the head of the tumultu ones.

48:46 woe be unto thee, O moab! the peopl of chemosh perisheth: for
thi son are taken captives, and thi daughter captives.

48:47 yet will I bring again the captiv of moab in the latter days,
saith the lord. thu far is the judgment of moab.

49:1 concern the ammonites, thu saith the lord; hath israel no
sons?  hath he no heir? whi then doth their king inherit gad, and his
peopl dwell in hi cities?  49:2 therefore, behold, the day come,
saith the lord, that I will caus an alarm of war to be heard in
rabbah of the ammonites; and it shall be a desol heap, and her
daught shall be burn with fire: then shall israel be heir unto
them that were hi heirs, saith the lord.

49:3 howl, O heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughter of rabbah,
gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for
their king shall go into captivity, and hi priest and hi princes
together.

49:4 wherefor gloriest thou in the valleys, thi flow valley, o
backslid daughter? that trust in her treasures, saying, who shall
com unto me?  49:5 behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the
lord god of hosts, from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be
driven out everi man right forth; and none shall gather up him that
wandereth.

49:6 and afterward I will bring again the captiv of the children of
ammon, saith the lord.

49:7 concern edom, thu saith the lord of hosts; Is wisdom no more
in teman? is counsel perish from the prudent? is their wisdom
vanished?  49:8 flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabit of
dedan; for I will bring the calam of esau upon him, the time that i
wil visit him.

49:9 If grapegather come to thee, would they not leav some
glean grapes? if thiev by night, they will destroy till they have
enough.

49:10 but I have made esau bare, I have uncov hi secret places,
and he shall not be abl to hide himself: hi seed is spoiled, and his
brethren, and hi neighbours, and he is not.

49:11 leav thi fatherless children, I will preserv them alive; and
let thi widow trust in me.

49:12 for thu saith the lord; behold, they whose judgment wa not to
drink of the cup have assuredli drunken; and art thou he that shall
altogeth go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt
sur drink of it.

49:13 for I have sworn by myself, saith the lord, that bozrah shall
becom a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the
citi thereof shall be perpetu wastes.

49:14 I have heard a rumour from the lord, and an ambassador is sent
unto the heathen, saying, gather ye together, and come against her,
and rise up to the battle.

49:15 for, lo, I will make thee small among the heathen, and despised
among men.

49:16 thi terribl hath deceiv thee, and the pride of thine
heart, O thou that dwellest in the cleft of the rock, that holdest
th height of the hill: though thou shouldest make thi nest as high as
th eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the lord.

49:17 also edom shall be a desolation: everi one that goeth by it
shal be astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagu thereof.

49:18 As in the overthrow of sodom and gomorrah and the neighbour
c thereof, saith the lord, no man shall abid there, neither
shal a son of man dwell in it.

49:19 behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swell of jordan
against the habit of the strong: but I will suddenli make him run
away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her?
for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that
shepherd that will stand befor me?  49:20 therefor hear the counsel
of the lord, that he hath taken against edom; and hi purposes, that
h hath purpos against the inhabit of teman: sure the least of
th flock shall draw them out: sure he shall make their habitations
desol with them.

49:21 the earth is move at the nois of their fall, at the cri the
nois thereof wa heard in the red sea.

49:22 behold, he shall come up and fli as the eagle, and spread his
w over bozrah: and at that day shall the heart of the mighti men
of edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

49:23 concern damascus. hamath is confounded, and arpad: for they
hav heard evil tidings: they are fainthearted; there is sorrow on the
sea; it cannot be quiet.

49:24 damascu is wax feeble, and turneth herself to flee, and fear
hath seiz on her: anguish and sorrow have taken her, as a woman in
travail.

49:25 how is the citi of prais not left, the citi of my joy!  49:26
therefor her young men shall fall in her streets, and all the men of
war shall be cut off in that day, saith the lord of hosts.

49:27 and I will kindl a fire in the wall of damascus, and it shall
consum the palac of benhadad.

49:28 concern kedar, and concern the kingdom of hazor, which
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon shall smite, thu saith the lord; arise
ye, go up to kedar, and spoil the men of the east.

49:29 their tent and their flock shall they take away: they shall
tak to themselv their curtains, and all their vessels, and their
camels; and they shall cri unto them, fear is on everi side.

49:30 flee, get you far off, dwell deep, O ye inhabit of hazor,
saith the lord; for nebuchadrezzar king of babylon hath taken counsel
against you, and hath conceiv a purpos against you.

49:31 arise, get you up unto the wealthi nation, that dwelleth without
care, saith the lord, which have neither gate nor bars, which dwell
alone.

49:32 and their camel shall be a booty, and the multitud of their
cattl a spoil: and I will scatter into all wind them that are in the
utmost corners; and I will bring their calam from all sides
thereof, saith the lord.

49:33 and hazor shall be a dwell for dragons, and a desol for
ever: there shall no man abid there, nor ani son of man dwell in it.

49:34 the word of the lord that came to jeremiah the prophet against
elam in the begin of the reign of zedekiah king of judah, saying,
49:35 thu saith the lord of hosts; behold, I will break the bow of
elam, the chief of their might.

49:36 and upon elam will I bring the four wind from the four quarters
of heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds; and there
shal be no nation whither the outcast of elam shall not come.

49:37 for I will caus elam to be dismay befor their enemies, and
befor them that seek their life: and I will bring evil upon them,
even my fierc anger, saith the lord; and I will send the sword after
them, till I have consum them: 49:38 and I will set my throne in
elam, and will destroy from thenc the king and the princes, saith the
lord.

49:39 but it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring
again the captiv of elam, saith the lord.

50:1 the word that the lord spake against babylon and against the land
of the chaldean by jeremiah the prophet.

50:2 declar ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard;
publish, and conceal not: say, babylon is taken, bel is confounded,
merodach is broken in pieces; her idol are confounded, her imag are
broken in pieces.

50:3 for out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which
shal make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall
remove, they shall depart, both man and beast.

50:4 In those days, and in that time, saith the lord, the children of
israel shall come, they and the children of judah together, go and
weeping: they shall go, and seek the lord their god.

50:5 they shall ask the way to zion with their face thitherward,
saying, come, and let us join ourselv to the lord in a perpetual
coven that shall not be forgotten.

50:6 My peopl hath been lost sheep: their shepherd have caus them
to go astray, they have turn them away on the mountains: they have
gon from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.

50:7 all that found them have devour them: and their adversaries
said, We offend not, becaus they have sin against the lord, the
habit of justice, even the lord, the hope of their fathers.

50:8 remov out of the midst of babylon, and go forth out of the land
of the chaldeans, and be as the he goat befor the flocks.

50:9 for, lo, I will rais and caus to come up against babylon an
assembl of great nation from the north country: and they shall set
themselv in array against her; from thenc she shall be taken: their
arrow shall be as of a mighti expert man; none shall return in vain.

50:10 and chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be
satisfied, saith the lord.

50:11 becaus ye were glad, becaus ye rejoiced, O ye destroy of
min heritage, becaus ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and
bellow as bulls; 50:12 your mother shall be sore confounded; she that
bar you shall be ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nation shall
b a wilderness, a dri land, and a desert.

50:13 becaus of the wrath of the lord it shall not be inhabited, but
it shall be wholli desolate: everi one that goeth by babylon shall be
astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.

50:14 put yourselv in array against babylon round about: all ye that
bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sinned
against the lord.

50:15 shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her
found are fallen, her wall are thrown down: for it is the
veng of the lord: take vengeanc upon her; as she hath done, do
unto her.

50:16 cut off the sower from babylon, and him that handleth the sickle
in the time of harvest: for fear of the oppress sword they shall
turn everi one to hi people, and they shall flee everi one to hi own
land.

50:17 israel is a scatter sheep; the lion have driven him away:
first the king of assyria hath devour him; and last this
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon hath broken hi bones.

50:18 therefor thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel;
behold, I will punish the king of babylon and hi land, as I have
punish the king of assyria.

50:19 and I will bring israel again to hi habitation, and he shall
fe on carmel and bashan, and hi soul shall be satisfi upon mount
ephraim and gilead.

50:20 In those days, and in that time, saith the lord, the iniqu of
israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sin of
judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom i
reserve.

50:21 Go up against the land of merathaim, even against it, and
against the inhabit of pekod: wast and utterli destroy after
them, saith the lord, and do accord to all that I have commanded
thee.

50:22 A sound of battl is in the land, and of great destruction.

50:23 how is the hammer of the whole earth cut asund and broken! how
i babylon becom a desol among the nations!  50:24 I have laid a
snar for thee, and thou art also taken, O babylon, and thou wast not
aware: thou art found, and also caught, becaus thou hast striven
against the lord.

50:25 the lord hath open hi armoury, and hath brought forth the
weapon of hi indignation: for thi is the work of the lord god of
host in the land of the chaldeans.

50:26 come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses:
cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let noth of her be
left.

50:27 slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe
unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation.

50:28 the voic of them that flee and escap out of the land of
babylon, to declar in zion the vengeanc of the lord our god, the
veng of hi temple.

50:29 call togeth the archer against babylon: all ye that bend the
bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense
h accord to her work; accord to all that she hath done, do
unto her: for she hath been proud against the lord, against the holy
on of israel.

50:30 therefor shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her
men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the lord.

50:31 behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, saith the lord god
of hosts: for thi day is come, the time that I will visit thee.

50:32 and the most proud shall stumbl and fall, and none shall raise
him up: and I will kindl a fire in hi cities, and it shall devour
al round about him.

50:33 thu saith the lord of hosts; the children of israel and the
children of judah were oppress together: and all that took them
capt held them fast; they refus to let them go.

50:34 their redeem is strong; the lord of host is hi name: he
shal throughli plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land,
and disquiet the inhabit of babylon.

50:35 A sword is upon the chaldeans, saith the lord, and upon the
inhabit of babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.

50:36 A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon
h mighti men; and they shall be dismayed.

50:37 A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon
al the mingl peopl that are in the midst of her; and they shall
becom as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be
robbed.

50:38 A drought is upon her waters; and they shall be dri up: for it
i the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols.

50:39 therefor the wild beast of the desert with the wild beast of
th island shall dwell there, and the owl shall dwell therein: and
it shall be no more inhabit for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in
from gener to generation.

50:40 As god overthrew sodom and gomorrah and the neighbour cities
thereof, saith the lord; so shall no man abid there, neither shall
ani son of man dwell therein.

50:41 behold, a peopl shall come from the north, and a great nation,
and mani king shall be rais up from the coast of the earth.

50:42 they shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will
not shew mercy: their voic shall roar like the sea, and they shall
rid upon horses, everi one put in array, like a man to the battle,
against thee, O daughter of babylon.

50:43 the king of babylon hath heard the report of them, and hi hands
wax feeble: anguish took hold of him, and pang as of a woman in
travail.

50:44 behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swell of jordan
unto the habit of the strong: but I will make them suddenli run
away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her?
for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that
shepherd that will stand befor me?  50:45 therefor hear ye the
counsel of the lord, that he hath taken against babylon; and his
purposes, that he hath purpos against the land of the chaldeans:
sur the least of the flock shall draw them out: sure he shall
mak their habit desol with them.

50:46 At the nois of the take of babylon the earth is moved, and
th cri is heard among the nations.

51:1 thu saith the lord; behold, I will rais up against babylon, and
against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me,
a destroy wind; 51:2 and will send unto babylon fanners, that shall
fan her, and shall empti her land: for in the day of troubl they
shal be against her round about.

51:3 against him that bendeth let the archer bend hi bow, and against
him that lifteth himself up in hi brigandine: and spare ye not her
young men; destroy ye utterli all her host.

51:4 thu the slain shall fall in the land of the chaldeans, and they
that are thrust through in her streets.

51:5 for israel hath not been forsaken, nor judah of hi god, of the
lord of hosts; though their land wa fill with sin against the holy
on of israel.

51:6 flee out of the midst of babylon, and deliv everi man hi soul:
b not cut off in her iniquity; for thi is the time of the lord's
vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.

51:7 babylon hath been a golden cup in the lord' hand, that made all
th earth drunken: the nation have drunken of her wine; therefor the
nat are mad.

51:8 babylon is suddenli fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm
for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

51:9 We would have heal babylon, but she is not healed: forsak her,
and let us go everi one into hi own country: for her judgment
reacheth unto heaven, and is lift up even to the skies.

51:10 the lord hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us
declar in zion the work of the lord our god.

51:11 make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the lord hath raised
up the spirit of the king of the medes: for hi devic is against
babylon, to destroy it; becaus it is the vengeanc of the lord, the
veng of hi temple.

51:12 set up the standard upon the wall of babylon, make the watch
strong, set up the watchmen, prepar the ambushes: for the lord hath
both devis and done that which he spake against the inhabit of
babylon.

51:13 O thou that dwellest upon mani waters, abund in treasures,
thin end is come, and the measur of thi covetousness.

51:14 the lord of host hath sworn by himself, saying, sure I will
fil thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a
shout against thee.

51:15 He hath made the earth by hi power, he hath establish the
world by hi wisdom, and hath stretch out the heaven by his
understanding.

51:16 when he uttereth hi voice, there is a multitud of water in
th heavens; and he causeth the vapour to ascend from the end of the
earth: he maketh lightn with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of hi treasures.

51:17 everi man is brutish by hi knowledge; everi founder is
confound by the graven image: for hi molten imag is falsehood, and
ther is no breath in them.

51:18 they are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their
visit they shall perish.

51:19 the portion of jacob is not like them; for he is the former of
al things: and israel is the rod of hi inheritance: the lord of
host is hi name.

51:20 thou art my battl axe and weapon of war: for with thee will i
break in piec the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;
51:21 and with thee will I break in piec the hors and hi rider;
and with thee will I break in piec the chariot and hi rider; 51:22
with thee also will I break in piec man and woman; and with thee
wil I break in piec old and young; and with thee will I break in
piec the young man and the maid; 51:23 I will also break in pieces
with thee the shepherd and hi flock; and with thee will I break in
piec the husbandman and hi yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break
in piec captain and rulers.

51:24 and I will render unto babylon and to all the inhabit of
chaldea all their evil that they have done in zion in your sight,
saith the lord.

51:25 behold, I am against thee, O destroy mountain, saith the
lord, which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand
upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a
burnt mountain.

51:26 and they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a
ston for foundations; but thou shalt be desol for ever, saith the
lord.

51:27 set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the
nations, prepar the nation against her, call togeth against her
th kingdom of ararat, minni, and ashchenaz; appoint a captain
against her; caus the hors to come up as the rough caterpillers.

51:28 prepar against her the nation with the king of the medes, the
captain thereof, and all the ruler thereof, and all the land of his
dominion.

51:29 and the land shall trembl and sorrow: for everi purpos of the
lord shall be perform against babylon, to make the land of babylon a
desol without an inhabitant.

51:30 the mighti men of babylon have forborn to fight, they have
remain in their holds: their might hath failed; they becam as
women: they have burn her dwellingplaces; her bar are broken.

51:31 one post shall run to meet another, and one messeng to meet
another, to shew the king of babylon that hi citi is taken at one
end, 51:32 and that the passag are stopped, and the reed they have
burn with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

51:33 for thu saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel; the
daught of babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh
her: yet a littl while, and the time of her harvest shall come.

51:34 nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon hath devour me, he hath
crush me, he hath made me an empti vessel, he hath swallow me up
lik a dragon, he hath fill hi belli with my delicates, he hath
cast me out.

51:35 the violenc done to me and to my flesh be upon babylon, shall
th inhabit of zion say; and my blood upon the inhabit of
chaldea, shall jerusalem say.

51:36 therefor thu saith the lord; behold, I will plead thi cause,
and take vengeanc for thee; and I will dri up her sea, and make her
spr dry.

51:37 and babylon shall becom heaps, a dwellingplac for dragons, an
astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant.

51:38 they shall roar togeth like lions: they shall yell as lions'
whelps.

51:39 In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them
drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetu sleep, and not
wake, saith the lord.

51:40 I will bring them down like lamb to the slaughter, like rams
with he goats.

51:41 how is sheshach taken! and how is the prais of the whole earth
surprised! how is babylon becom an astonish among the nations!
51:42 the sea is come up upon babylon: she is cover with the
multitud of the wave thereof.

51:43 her citi are a desolation, a dri land, and a wilderness, a
land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth ani son of man pass
thereby.

51:44 and I will punish bel in babylon, and I will bring forth out of
hi mouth that which he hath swallow up: and the nation shall not
flow togeth ani more unto him: yea, the wall of babylon shall fall.

51:45 My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliv ye every
man hi soul from the fierc anger of the lord.

51:46 and lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall
b heard in the land; a rumour shall both come one year, and after
that in anoth year shall come a rumour, and violenc in the land,
rul against ruler.

51:47 therefore, behold, the day come, that I will do judgment upon
th graven imag of babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded,
and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.

51:48 then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall
s for babylon: for the spoiler shall come unto her from the north,
saith the lord.

51:49 As babylon hath caus the slain of israel to fall, so at
babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.

51:50 Ye that have escap the sword, go away, stand not still:
rememb the lord afar off, and let jerusalem come into your mind.

51:51 We are confounded, becaus we have heard reproach: shame hath
cov our faces: for stranger are come into the sanctuari of the
lord' house.

51:52 wherefore, behold, the day come, saith the lord, that I will do
judg upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded
shal groan.

51:53 though babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should
fortifi the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoiler come
unto her, saith the lord.

51:54 A sound of a cri cometh from babylon, and great destruct from
th land of the chaldeans: 51:55 becaus the lord hath spoiled
babylon, and destroy out of her the great voice; when her wave do
roar like great waters, a nois of their voic is uttered: 51:56
becaus the spoiler is come upon her, even upon babylon, and her
mighti men are taken, everi one of their bow is broken: for the lord
god of recomp shall sure requite.

51:57 and I will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her
captains, and her rulers, and her mighti men: and they shall sleep a
perpetu sleep, and not wake, saith the king, whose name is the lord
of hosts.

51:58 thu saith the lord of hosts; the broad wall of babylon shall
b utterli broken, and her high gate shall be burn with fire; and
th peopl shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they
shal be weary.

51:59 the word which jeremiah the prophet command seraiah the son of
neriah, the son of maaseiah, when he went with zedekiah the king of
judah into babylon in the fourth year of hi reign. and thi seraiah
wa a quiet prince.

51:60 So jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon
babylon, even all these word that are written against babylon.

51:61 and jeremiah said to seraiah, when thou comest to babylon, and
shalt see, and shalt read all these words; 51:62 then shalt thou say,
o lord, thou hast spoken against thi place, to cut it off, that none
shal remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be
desol for ever.

51:63 and it shall be, when thou hast made an end of read this
book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst
of euphrates: 51:64 and thou shalt say, thu shall babylon sink, and
shal not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her: and they
shal be weary. thu far are the word of jeremiah.

52:1 zedekiah wa one and twenti year old when he began to reign, and
h reign eleven year in jerusalem. and hi mother' name was
hamut the daughter of jeremiah of libnah.

52:2 and he did that which wa evil in the eye of the lord, according
to all that jehoiakim had done.

52:3 for through the anger of the lord it came to pass in jerusalem
and judah, till he had cast them out from hi presence, that zedekiah
rebel against the king of babylon.

52:4 and it came to pass in the ninth year of hi reign, in the tenth
month, in the tenth day of the month, that nebuchadrezzar king of
babylon came, he and all hi army, against jerusalem, and pitched
against it, and built fort against it round about.

52:5 So the citi wa besieg unto the eleventh year of king zedekiah.

52:6 and in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the
famin wa sore in the city, so that there wa no bread for the people
of the land.

52:7 then the citi wa broken up, and all the men of war fled, and
went forth out of the citi by night by the way of the gate between the
two walls, which wa by the king' garden; (now the chaldean were by
th citi round about:) and they went by the way of the plain.

52:8 but the armi of the chaldean pursu after the king, and
overtook zedekiah in the plain of jericho; and all hi armi was
scatt from him.

52:9 then they took the king, and carri him up unto the king of
babylon to riblah in the land of hamath; where he gave judgment upon
him.

52:10 and the king of babylon slew the son of zedekiah befor his
eyes: he slew also all the princ of judah in riblah.

52:11 then he put out the eye of zedekiah; and the king of babylon
bound him in chains, and carri him to babylon, and put him in prison
til the day of hi death.

52:12 now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was
th nineteenth year of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, came
nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, which serv the king of babylon,
into jerusalem, 52:13 and burn the hous of the lord, and the king's
house; and all the hous of jerusalem, and all the hous of the
great men, burn he with fire: 52:14 and all the armi of the
chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down all the
wal of jerusalem round about.

52:15 then nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carri away captive
certain of the poor of the people, and the residu of the peopl that
remain in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king
of babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

52:16 but nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the
poor of the land for vinedress and for husbandmen.

52:17 also the pillar of brass that were in the hous of the lord,
and the bases, and the brasen sea that wa in the hous of the lord,
th chaldean brake, and carri all the brass of them to babylon.

52:18 the caldron also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the
bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessel of brass wherewith they
ministered, took they away.

52:19 and the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the
caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that
which wa of gold in gold, and that which wa of silver in silver,
took the captain of the guard away.

52:20 the two pillars, one sea, and twelv brasen bull that were
und the bases, which king solomon had made in the hous of the lord:
th brass of all these vessel wa without weight.

52:21 and concern the pillars, the height of one pillar was
eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelv cubit did compass it; and the
thick thereof wa four fingers: it wa hollow.

52:22 and a chapit of brass wa upon it; and the height of one
chapit wa five cubits, with network and pomegran upon the
chapit round about, all of brass. the second pillar also and the
pomegran were like unto these.

52:23 and there were nineti and six pomegran on a side; and all
th pomegran upon the network were an hundr round about.

52:24 and the captain of the guard took seraiah the chief priest, and
zephaniah the second priest, and the three keeper of the door: 52:25
he took also out of the citi an eunuch, which had the charg of the
men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king' person,
which were found in the city; and the princip scribe of the host,
who muster the peopl of the land; and threescor men of the people
of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.

52:26 So nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought
them to the king of babylon to riblah.

52:27 and the king of babylon smote them, and put them to death in
riblah in the land of hamath. thu judah wa carri away captiv out
of hi own land.

52:28 thi is the peopl whom nebuchadrezzar carri away captive: in
th seventh year three thousand jew and three and twenty: 52:29 in
th eighteenth year of nebuchadrezzar he carri away captiv from
jerusalem eight hundr thirti and two persons: 52:30 In the three and
twentieth year of nebuchadrezzar nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
carri away captiv of the jew seven hundr forti and five persons:
al the person were four thousand and six hundred.

52:31 and it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
capt of jehoiachin king of judah, in the twelfth month, in the
fiv and twentieth day of the month, that evilmerodach king of babylon
in the first year of hi reign lift up the head of jehoiachin king
of judah, and brought him forth out of prison.

52:32 and spake kindli unto him, and set hi throne abov the throne
of the king that were with him in babylon, 52:33 and chang his
prison garments: and he did continu eat bread befor him all the
day of hi life.

52:34 and for hi diet, there wa a continu diet given him of the
k of babylon, everi day a portion until the day of hi death, all
th day of hi life.




th lament of jeremiah


1:1 how doth the citi sit solitary, that wa full of people! how is
sh becom as a widow! she that wa great among the nations, and
princess among the provinces, how is she becom tributary!  1:2 she
weepeth sore in the night, and her tear are on her cheeks: among all
her lover she hath none to comfort her: all her friend have dealt
treacher with her, they are becom her enemies.

1:3 judah is gone into captiv becaus of affliction, and becaus of
great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest:
al her persecutor overtook her between the straits.

1:4 the way of zion do mourn, becaus none come to the solemn feasts:
al her gate are desolate: her priest sigh, her virgin are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness.

1:5 her adversari are the chief, her enemi prosper; for the lord
hath afflict her for the multitud of her transgressions: her
children are gone into captiv befor the enemy.

1:6 and from the daughter of zion all her beauti is departed: her
princ are becom like hart that find no pasture, and they are gone
without strength befor the pursuer.

1:7 jerusalem rememb in the day of her afflict and of her
miseri all her pleasant thing that she had in the day of old, when
her peopl fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the
adversari saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths.

1:8 jerusalem hath grievous sinned; therefor she is removed: all
that honour her despis her, becaus they have seen her nakedness:
yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.

1:9 her filthi is in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end;
therefor she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter. O lord,
behold my affliction: for the enemi hath magnifi himself.

1:10 the adversari hath spread out hi hand upon all her pleasant
things: for she hath seen that the heathen enter into her sanctuary,
whom thou didst command that they should not enter into thy
congregation.

1:11 all her peopl sigh, they seek bread; they have given their
pleas thing for meat to reliev the soul: see, O lord, and
consider; for I am becom vile.

1:12 Is it noth to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if
ther be ani sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me,
wherewith the lord hath afflict me in the day of hi fierc anger.

1:13 from abov hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth
against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turn me
back: he hath made me desol and faint all the day.

1:14 the yoke of my transgress is bound by hi hand: they are
wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall,
th lord hath deliv me into their hands, from whom I am not able
to rise up.

1:15 the lord hath trodden under foot all my mighti men in the midst
of me: he hath call an assembl against me to crush my young men:
th lord hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of judah, as in a
winepress.

1:16 for these thing I weep; mine eye, mine eye runneth down with
water, becaus the comfort that should reliev my soul is far from
me: my children are desolate, becaus the enemi prevailed.

1:17 zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her:
th lord hath command concern jacob, that hi adversari should
b round about him: jerusalem is as a menstruou woman among them.

1:18 the lord is righteous; for I have rebel against his
commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my
virgin and my young men are gone into captivity.

1:19 I call for my lovers, but they deceiv me: my priest and mine
eld gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to
reliev their souls.

1:20 behold, O lord; for I am in distress: my bowel are troubled;
min heart is turn within me; for I have grievous rebelled: abroad
th sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.

1:21 they have heard that I sigh: there is none to comfort me: all
min enemi have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast
don it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, and they shall
b like unto me.

1:22 let all their wicked come befor thee; and do unto them, as
thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sigh are
many, and my heart is faint.

2:1 how hath the lord cover the daughter of zion with a cloud in his
anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauti of israel,
and rememb not hi footstool in the day of hi anger!  2:2 the
lord hath swallow up all the habit of jacob, and hath not
pitied: he hath thrown down in hi wrath the strong hold of the
daught of judah; he hath brought them down to the ground: he hath
pollut the kingdom and the princ thereof.

2:3 He hath cut off in hi fierc anger all the horn of israel: he
hath drawn back hi right hand from befor the enemy, and he burned
against jacob like a flame fire, which devoureth round about.

2:4 He hath bent hi bow like an enemy: he stood with hi right hand
a an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant to the eye in the
tabernacl of the daughter of zion: he pour out hi furi like fire.

2:5 the lord wa as an enemy: he hath swallow up israel, he hath
swallow up all her palaces: he hath destroy hi strong holds, and
hath increas in the daughter of judah mourn and lamentation.

2:6 and he hath violent taken away hi tabernacle, as if it were of
a garden: he hath destroy hi place of the assembly: the lord hath
caus the solemn feast and sabbath to be forgotten in zion, and
hath despis in the indign of hi anger the king and the priest.

2:7 the lord hath cast off hi altar, he hath abhor hi sanctuary,
h hath given up into the hand of the enemi the wall of her palaces;
they have made a nois in the hous of the lord, as in the day of a
solemn feast.

2:8 the lord hath purpos to destroy the wall of the daughter of
zion: he hath stretch out a line, he hath not withdrawn hi hand
from destroying: therefor he made the rampart and the wall to lament;
they languish together.

2:9 her gate are sunk into the ground; he hath destroy and broken
h bars: her king and her princ are among the gentiles: the law is
no more; her prophet also find no vision from the lord.

2:10 the elder of the daughter of zion sit upon the ground, and keep
silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded
themselv with sackcloth: the virgin of jerusalem hang down their
head to the ground.

2:11 mine eye do fail with tears, my bowel are troubled, my liver is
pour upon the earth, for the destruct of the daughter of my
people; becaus the children and the suckl swoon in the street of
th city.

2:12 they say to their mothers, where is corn and wine? when they
swoon as the wound in the street of the city, when their soul was
pour out into their mothers' bosom.

2:13 what thing shall I take to wit for thee? what thing shall i
liken to thee, O daughter of jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee,
that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of zion? for thi breach is
great like the sea: who can heal thee?  2:14 thi prophet have seen
vain and foolish thing for thee: and they have not discov thine
iniquity, to turn away thi captivity; but have seen for thee false
burden and caus of banishment.

2:15 all that pass by clap their hand at thee; they hiss and wag
their head at the daughter of jerusalem, saying, Is thi the citi that
men call the perfect of beauty, the joy of the whole earth?  2:16
all thine enemi have open their mouth against thee: they hiss and
gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallow her up: certainli thi is
th day that we look for; we have found, we have seen it.

2:17 the lord hath done that which he had devised; he hath fulfilled
hi word that he had command in the day of old: he hath thrown
down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caus thine enemi to rejoice
ov thee, he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries.

2:18 their heart cri unto the lord, O wall of the daughter of zion,
let tear run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest;
let not the appl of thine eye cease.

2:19 arise, cri out in the night: in the begin of the watch pour
out thine heart like water befor the face of the lord: lift up thy
hand toward him for the life of thi young children, that faint for
hung in the top of everi street.

2:20 behold, O lord, and consid to whom thou hast done this. shall
th women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shall the
priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuari of the lord?  2:21
the young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgin and
mi young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain them in the day
of thine anger; thou hast killed, and not pitied.

2:22 thou hast call as in a solemn day my terror round about, so
that in the day of the lord' anger none escap nor remained: those
that I have swaddl and brought up hath mine enemi consumed.

3:1 I AM the man that hath seen afflict by the rod of hi wrath.

3:2 He hath led me, and brought me into darkness, but not into light.

3:3 sure against me is he turned; he turneth hi hand against me all
th day.

3:4 My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones.

3:5 He hath build against me, and compass me with gall and
travail.

3:6 He hath set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old.

3:7 He hath hedg me about, that I cannot get out: he hath made my
chain heavy.

3:8 also when I cri and shout, he shutteth out my prayer.

3:9 He hath inclos my way with hewn stone, he hath made my paths
crooked.

3:10 He wa unto me as a bear lie in wait, and as a lion in secret
places.

3:11 He hath turn asid my ways, and pull me in pieces: he hath
mad me desolate.

3:12 He hath bent hi bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.

3:13 He hath caus the arrow of hi quiver to enter into my reins.

3:14 I wa a deris to all my people; and their song all the day.

3:15 He hath fill me with bitterness, he hath made me drunken with
wormwood.

3:16 He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath covered
m with ashes.

3:17 and thou hast remov my soul far off from peace: I forgat
prosperity.

3:18 and I said, My strength and my hope is perish from the lord:
3:19 rememb mine afflict and my misery, the wormwood and the
gall.

3:20 My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbl in me.

3:21 thi I recal to my mind, therefor have I hope.

3:22 It is of the lord' merci that we are not consumed, becaus his
compass fail not.

3:23 they are new everi morning: great is thi faithfulness.

3:24 the lord is my portion, saith my soul; therefor will I hope in
him.

3:25 the lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeketh him.

3:26 It is good that a man should both hope and quietli wait for the
salv of the lord.

3:27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke of hi youth.

3:28 He sitteth alon and keepeth silence, becaus he hath born it
upon him.

3:29 He putteth hi mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope.

3:30 He giveth hi cheek to him that smiteth him: he is fill full
with reproach.

3:31 for the lord will not cast off for ever: 3:32 but though he cause
grief, yet will he have compass accord to the multitud of his
mercies.

3:33 for he doth not afflict willingli nor griev the children of men.

3:34 To crush under hi feet all the prison of the earth.

3:35 To turn asid the right of a man befor the face of the most
high, 3:36 To subvert a man in hi cause, the lord approveth not.

3:37 who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the lord
commandeth it not?  3:38 out of the mouth of the most high proceedeth
not evil and good?  3:39 wherefor doth a live man complain, a man
for the punish of hi sins?  3:40 let us search and tri our ways,
and turn again to the lord.

3:41 let us lift up our heart with our hand unto god in the heavens.

3:42 We have transgress and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.

3:43 thou hast cover with anger, and persecut us: thou hast slain,
thou hast not pitied.

3:44 thou hast cover thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should
not pass through.

3:45 thou hast made us as the offscour and refus in the midst of
th people.

3:46 all our enemi have open their mouth against us.

3:47 fear and a snare is come upon us, desol and destruction.

3:48 mine eye runneth down with river of water for the destruct of
th daughter of my people.

3:49 mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any
intermission.

3:50 till the lord look down, and behold from heaven.

3:51 mine eye affecteth mine heart becaus of all the daughter of my
city.

3:52 mine enemi chase me sore, like a bird, without cause.

3:53 they have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon
me.

3:54 water flow over mine head; then I said, I am cut off.

3:55 I call upon thi name, O lord, out of the low dungeon.

3:56 thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at
mi cry.

3:57 thou drewest near in the day that I call upon thee: thou
saidst, fear not.

3:58 O lord, thou hast plead the caus of my soul; thou hast
redeem my life.

3:59 O lord, thou hast seen my wrong: judg thou my cause.

3:60 thou hast seen all their vengeanc and all their imaginations
against me.

3:61 thou hast heard their reproach, O lord, and all their
imagin against me; 3:62 the lip of those that rose up against
me, and their devic against me all the day.

3:63 behold their sit down, and their rise up; I am their
musick.

3:64 render unto them a recompence, O lord, accord to the work of
their hands.

3:65 give them sorrow of heart, thi curs unto them.

3:66 persecut and destroy them in anger from under the heaven of the
lord.

4:1 how is the gold becom dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the
ston of the sanctuari are pour out in the top of everi street.

4:2 the preciou son of zion, compar to fine gold, how are they
esteem as earthen pitchers, the work of the hand of the potter!
4:3 even the sea monster draw out the breast, they give suck to their
young ones: the daughter of my peopl is becom cruel, like the
ostrich in the wilderness.

4:4 the tongu of the suck child cleaveth to the roof of hi mouth
for thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto
them.

4:5 they that did feed delic are desol in the streets: they
that were brought up in scarlet embrac dunghills.

4:6 for the punish of the iniqu of the daughter of my peopl is
great than the punish of the sin of sodom, that wa overthrown
a in a moment, and no hand stay on her.

4:7 her nazarit were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk,
they were more ruddi in bodi than rubies, their polish wa of
sapphire: 4:8 their visag is blacker than a coal; they are not known
in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it
i becom like a stick.

4:9 they that be slain with the sword are better than they that be
slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of
th fruit of the field.

4:10 the hand of the piti women have sodden their own children:
they were their meat in the destruct of the daughter of my people.

4:11 the lord hath accomplish hi fury; he hath pour out his
fierc anger, and hath kindl a fire in zion, and it hath devoured
th foundat thereof.

4:12 the king of the earth, and all the inhabit of the world,
would not have believ that the adversari and the enemi should have
ent into the gate of jerusalem.

4:13 for the sin of her prophets, and the iniqu of her priests,
that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her, 4:14 they
hav wander as blind men in the streets, they have polluted
themselv with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.

4:15 they cri unto them, depart ye; it is unclean; depart, depart,
touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the
heathen, they shall no more sojourn there.

4:16 the anger of the lord hath divid them; he will no more regard
them: they respect not the person of the priests, they favour not
th elders.

4:17 As for us, our eye as yet fail for our vain help: in our
watch we have watch for a nation that could not save us.

4:18 they hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets: our end is
near, our day are fulfilled; for our end is come.

4:19 our persecutor are swifter than the eagl of the heaven: they
pursu us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the
wilderness.

4:20 the breath of our nostrils, the anoint of the lord, wa taken
in their pits, of whom we said, under hi shadow we shall live among
th heathen.

4:21 rejoic and be glad, O daughter of edom, that dwellest in the
land of uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be
drunken, and shalt make thyself naked.

4:22 the punish of thine iniqu is accomplished, O daughter of
zion; he will no more carri thee away into captivity: he will visit
thin iniquity, O daughter of edom; he will discov thi sins.

5:1 remember, O lord, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our
reproach.

5:2 our inherit is turn to strangers, our hous to aliens.

5:3 We are orphan and fatherless, our mother are as widows.

5:4 We have drunken our water for money; our wood is sold unto us.

5:5 our neck are under persecution: we labour, and have no rest.

5:6 We have given the hand to the egyptians, and to the assyrians, to
b satisfi with bread.

5:7 our father have sinned, and are not; and we have born their
iniquities.

5:8 servant have rule over us: there is none that doth deliv us
out of their hand.

5:9 We gat our bread with the peril of our live becaus of the sword
of the wilderness.

5:10 our skin wa black like an oven becaus of the terribl famine.

5:11 they ravish the women in zion, and the maid in the citi of
judah.

5:12 princ are hang up by their hand: the face of elder were not
honoured.

5:13 they took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the
wood.

5:14 the elder have ceas from the gate, the young men from their
musick.

5:15 the joy of our heart is ceased; our danc is turn into
mourning.

5:16 the crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us, that we have
sinned!  5:17 for thi our heart is faint; for these thing our eyes
ar dim.

5:18 becaus of the mountain of zion, which is desolate, the foxes
walk upon it.

5:19 thou, O lord, remainest for ever; thi throne from gener to
generation.

5:20 wherefor dost thou forget us for ever, and forsak us so long
time?  5:21 turn thou us unto thee, O lord, and we shall be turned;
renew our day as of old.

5:22 but thou hast utterli reject us; thou art veri wroth against us.




th book of the prophet ezekiel


1:1 now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month,
in the fifth day of the month, as I wa among the captiv by the river
of chebar, that the heaven were opened, and I saw vision of god.

1:2 In the fifth day of the month, which wa the fifth year of king
jehoiachin' captivity, 1:3 the word of the lord came expressli unto
ezekiel the priest, the son of buzi, in the land of the chaldean by
th river chebar; and the hand of the lord wa there upon him.

1:4 and I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
great cloud, and a fire infold itself, and a bright wa about
it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the
midst of the fire.

1:5 also out of the midst thereof came the like of four living
creatures. and thi wa their appearance; they had the like of a
man.

1:6 and everi one had four faces, and everi one had four wings.

1:7 and their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was
lik the sole of a calf' foot: and they sparkl like the colour of
burnish brass.

1:8 and they had the hand of a man under their wing on their four
sides; and they four had their face and their wings.

1:9 their wing were join one to another; they turn not when they
went; they went everi one straight forward.

1:10 As for the like of their faces, they four had the face of a
man, and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the
fac of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an
eagle.

1:11 thu were their faces: and their wing were stretch upward; two
w of everi one were join one to another, and two cover their
bodies.

1:12 and they went everi one straight forward: whither the spirit was
to go, they went; and they turn not when they went.

1:13 As for the like of the live creatures, their appear was
lik burn coal of fire, and like the appear of lamps: it went
up and down among the live creatures; and the fire wa bright, and
out of the fire went forth lightning.

1:14 and the live creatur ran and return as the appear of a
flash of lightning.

1:15 now as I beheld the live creatures, behold one wheel upon the
earth by the live creatures, with hi four faces.

1:16 the appear of the wheel and their work wa like unto the
colour of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their
appear and their work wa as it were a wheel in the middl of a
wheel.

1:17 when they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned
not when they went.

1:18 As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful;
and their ring were full of eye round about them four.

1:19 and when the live creatur went, the wheel went by them: and
when the live creatur were lift up from the earth, the wheels
wer lift up.

1:20 whithersoev the spirit wa to go, they went, thither wa their
spirit to go; and the wheel were lift up over against them: for the
spirit of the live creatur wa in the wheels.

1:21 when those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood;
and when those were lift up from the earth, the wheel were lifted
up over against them: for the spirit of the live creatur wa in the
wheels.

1:22 and the like of the firmament upon the head of the living
creatur wa as the colour of the terribl crystal, stretch forth
ov their head above.

1:23 and under the firmament were their wing straight, the one toward
th other: everi one had two, which cover on thi side, and every
on had two, which cover on that side, their bodies.

1:24 and when they went, I heard the nois of their wings, like the
nois of great waters, as the voic of the almighty, the voic of
speech, as the nois of an host: when they stood, they let down their
wings.

1:25 and there wa a voic from the firmament that wa over their
heads, when they stood, and had let down their wings.

1:26 and abov the firmament that wa over their head wa the
lik of a throne, as the appear of a sapphir stone: and upon
th like of the throne wa the like as the appear of a man
abov upon it.

1:27 and I saw as the colour of amber, as the appear of fire round
about within it, from the appear of hi loin even upward, and
from the appear of hi loin even downward, I saw as it were the
appear of fire, and it had bright round about.

1:28 As the appear of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
rain, so wa the appear of the bright round about. thi was
th appear of the like of the glori of the lord. and when i
saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voic of one that spake.

2:1 and he said unto me, son of man, stand upon thi feet, and I will
speak unto thee.

2:2 and the spirit enter into me when he spake unto me, and set me
upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me.

2:3 and he said unto me, son of man, I send thee to the children of
israel, to a rebelli nation that hath rebel against me: they and
their father have transgress against me, even unto thi veri day.

2:4 for they are impud children and stiffhearted. I do send thee
unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, thu saith the lord god.

2:5 and they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
(for they are a rebelli house,) yet shall know that there hath been
a prophet among them.

2:6 and thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of
their words, though brier and thorn be with thee, and thou dost
dwel among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed
at their looks, though they be a rebelli house.

2:7 and thou shalt speak my word unto them, whether they will hear,
or whether they will forbear: for they are most rebellious.

2:8 but thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou
rebelli like that rebelli house: open thi mouth, and eat that i
giv thee.

2:9 and when I looked, behold, an hand wa sent unto me; and, lo, a
rol of a book wa therein; 2:10 and he spread it befor me; and it
wa written within and without: and there wa written therein
lamentations, and mourning, and woe.

3:1 moreov he said unto me, son of man, eat that thou findest; eat
thi roll, and go speak unto the hous of israel.

3:2 So I open my mouth, and he caus me to eat that roll.

3:3 and he said unto me, son of man, caus thi belli to eat, and fill
thi bowel with thi roll that I give thee. then did I eat it; and it
wa in my mouth as honey for sweetness.

3:4 and he said unto me, son of man, go, get thee unto the hous of
israel, and speak with my word unto them.

3:5 for thou art not sent to a peopl of a strang speech and of an
hard language, but to the hous of israel; 3:6 not to mani peopl of a
strang speech and of an hard language, whose word thou canst not
understand. surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened
unto thee.

3:7 but the hous of israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will
not hearken unto me: for all the hous of israel are impud and
hardhearted.

3:8 behold, I have made thi face strong against their faces, and thy
forehead strong against their foreheads.

3:9 As an adam harder than flint have I made thi forehead: fear
them not, neither be dismay at their looks, though they be a
rebelli house.

3:10 moreov he said unto me, son of man, all my word that I shall
speak unto thee receiv in thine heart, and hear with thine ears.

3:11 and go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of
thi people, and speak unto them, and tell them, thu saith the lord
god; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

3:12 then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voic of a
great rushing, saying, bless be the glori of the lord from his
place.

3:13 I heard also the nois of the wing of the live creatur that
touch one another, and the nois of the wheel over against them,
and a nois of a great rushing.

3:14 So the spirit lift me up, and took me away, and I went in
bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the lord was
strong upon me.

3:15 then I came to them of the captiv at telabib, that dwelt by
th river of chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remain there
astonish among them seven days.

3:16 and it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of
th lord came unto me, saying, 3:17 son of man, I have made thee a
watchman unto the hous of israel: therefor hear the word at my
mouth, and give them warn from me.

3:18 when I say unto the wicked, thou shalt sure die; and thou
givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wick from his
wick way, to save hi life; the same wick man shall die in his
iniquity; but hi blood will I requir at thine hand.

3:19 yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from hi wickedness,
nor from hi wick way, he shall die in hi iniquity; but thou hast
deliv thi soul.

3:20 again, when a righteou man doth turn from hi righteousness, and
commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling-block befor him, he shall die:
becaus thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in hi sin, and
hi righteous which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his
blood will I requir at thine hand.

3:21 nevertheless if thou warn the righteou man, that the righteous
sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall sure live, becaus he is
warned; also thou hast deliv thi soul.

3:22 and the hand of the lord wa there upon me; and he said unto me,
arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee.

3:23 then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the
glori of the lord stood there, as the glori which I saw by the river
of chebar: and I fell on my face.

3:24 then the spirit enter into me, and set me upon my feet, and
spak with me, and said unto me, go, shut thyself within thine house.

3:25 but thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put band upon thee,
and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them:
3:26 and I will make thi tongu cleav to the roof of thi mouth, that
thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are
a rebelli house.

3:27 but when I speak with thee, I will open thi mouth, and thou shalt
say unto them, thu saith the lord god; He that heareth, let him hear;
and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious
house.

4:1 thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it befor thee,
and pourtray upon it the city, even jerusalem: 4:2 and lay siege
against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it;
set the camp also against it, and set batter ram against it round
about.

4:3 moreov take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of
iron between thee and the city: and set thi face against it, and it
shal be besieged, and thou shalt lay sieg against it. thi shall be
a sign to the hous of israel.

4:4 lie thou also upon thi left side, and lay the iniqu of the
hous of israel upon it: accord to the number of the day that thou
shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity.

4:5 for I have laid upon thee the year of their iniquity, according
to the number of the days, three hundr and nineti days: so shalt
thou bear the iniqu of the hous of israel.

4:6 and when thou hast accomplish them, lie again on thi right side,
and thou shalt bear the iniqu of the hous of judah forti days: i
hav appoint thee each day for a year.

4:7 therefor thou shalt set thi face toward the sieg of jerusalem,
and thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesi against it.

4:8 and, behold, I will lay band upon thee, and thou shalt not turn
the from one side to another, till thou hast end the day of thy
siege.

4:9 take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and
lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and
mak thee bread thereof, accord to the number of the day that thou
shalt lie upon thi side, three hundr and nineti day shalt thou eat
thereof.

4:10 and thi meat which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty
shekel a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

4:11 thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin:
from time to time shalt thou drink.

4:12 and thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it
with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight.

4:13 and the lord said, even thu shall the children of israel eat
their defil bread among the gentiles, whither I will drive them.

4:14 then said I, Ah lord god! behold, my soul hath not been polluted:
for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which
dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable
flesh into my mouth.

4:15 then he said unto me, lo, I have given thee cow' dung for man's
dung, and thou shalt prepar thi bread therewith.

4:16 moreov he said unto me, son of man, behold, I will break the
staff of bread in jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and
with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with
astonishment: 4:17 that they may want bread and water, and be astonied
on with another, and consum away for their iniquity.

5:1 and thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a
barber' razor, and caus it to pass upon thine head and upon thy
beard: then take thee balanc to weigh, and divid the hair.

5:2 thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city,
when the day of the sieg are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third
part, and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt
scatt in the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them.

5:3 thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy
skirts.

5:4 then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire,
and burn them in the fire; for thereof shall a fire come forth into
al the hous of israel.

5:5 thu saith the lord god; thi is jerusalem: I have set it in the
midst of the nation and countri that are round about her.

5:6 and she hath chang my judgment into wicked more than the
nations, and my statut more than the countri that are round about
her: for they have refus my judgment and my statutes, they have not
walk in them.

5:7 therefor thu saith the lord god; becaus ye multipli more than
th nation that are round about you, and have not walk in my
statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according
to the judgment of the nation that are round about you; 5:8
therefor thu saith the lord god; behold, I, even I, am against thee,
and will execut judgment in the midst of thee in the sight of the
nations.

5:9 and I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto i
wil not do ani more the like, becaus of all thine abominations.

5:10 therefor the father shall eat the son in the midst of thee,
and the son shall eat their fathers; and I will execut judgment in
thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds.

5:11 wherefore, as I live, saith the lord god; surely, becaus thou
hast defil my sanctuari with all thi detest things, and with all
thin abominations, therefor will I also diminish thee; neither shall
min eye spare, neither will I have ani pity.

5:12 A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with
famin shall they be consum in the midst of thee: and a third part
shal fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third
part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.

5:13 thu shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will caus my fury
to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that i
th lord have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplish my fury
in them.

5:14 moreov I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations
that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.

5:15 So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruct and an
astonish unto the nation that are round about thee, when I shall
execut judgment in thee in anger and in furi and in furiou rebukes.
i the lord have spoken it.

5:16 when I shall send upon them the evil arrow of famine, which
shal be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you:
and I will increas the famin upon you, and will break your staff of
bread: 5:17 So will I send upon you famin and evil beasts, and they
shal bereav thee: and pestil and blood shall pass through thee;
and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the lord have spoken it.

6:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 6:2 son of man, set
thi face toward the mountain of israel, and prophesi against them,
6:3 and say, Ye mountain of israel, hear the word of the lord god;
thu saith the lord god to the mountains, and to the hills, to the
rivers, and to the valleys; behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon
you, and I will destroy your high places.

6:4 and your altar shall be desolate, and your imag shall be
broken: and I will cast down your slain men befor your idols.

6:5 and I will lay the dead carcas of the children of israel before
their idols; and I will scatter your bone round about your altars.

6:6 In all your dwellingplac the citi shall be laid waste, and the
high place shall be desolate; that your altar may be laid wast and
mad desolate, and your idol may be broken and cease, and your images
may be cut down, and your work may be abolished.

6:7 and the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know
that I am the lord.

6:8 yet will I leav a remnant, that ye may have some that shall
escap the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scatter through
th countries.

6:9 and they that escap of you shall rememb me among the nations
whith they shall be carri captives, becaus I am broken with their
whorish heart, which hath depart from me, and with their eyes, which
go a whore after their idols: and they shall loth themselv for
th evil which they have commit in all their abominations.

6:10 and they shall know that I am the lord, and that I have not said
in vain that I would do thi evil unto them.

6:11 thu saith the lord god; smite with thine hand, and stamp with
thi foot, and say, ala for all the evil abomin of the hous of
israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence.

6:12 He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is
near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged
shal die by the famine: thu will I accomplish my furi upon them.

6:13 then shall ye know that I am the lord, when their slain men shall
b among their idol round about their altars, upon everi high hill,
in all the top of the mountains, and under everi green tree, and
und everi thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to
al their idols.

6:14 So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land
desolate, yea, more desol than the wilder toward diblath, in
al their habitations: and they shall know that I am the lord.

7:1 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 7:2 also, thou
son of man, thu saith the lord god unto the land of israel; An end,
th end is come upon the four corner of the land.

7:3 now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon
thee, and will judg thee accord to thi ways, and will recompense
upon thee all thine abominations.

7:4 and mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but i
wil recompens thi way upon thee, and thine abomin shall be in
th midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am the lord.

7:5 thu saith the lord god; An evil, an onli evil, behold, is come.

7:6 An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it
i come.

7:7 the morn is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land:
th time is come, the day of troubl is near, and not the sounding
again of the mountains.

7:8 now will I shortli pour out my furi upon thee, and accomplish mine
ang upon thee: and I will judg thee accord to thi ways, and will
recompens thee for all thine abominations.

7:9 and mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will
recompens thee accord to thi way and thine abomin that are
in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the lord that
smiteth.

7:10 behold the day, behold, it is come: the morn is gone forth;
th rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.

7:11 violenc is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them shall
remain, nor of their multitude, nor of ani of their's: neither shall
ther be wail for them.

7:12 the time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer
rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all the multitude
thereof.

7:13 for the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although
they were yet alive: for the vision is touch the whole multitude
thereof, which shall not return; neither shall ani strengthen himself
in the iniqu of hi life.

7:14 they have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready; but none
goeth to the battle: for my wrath is upon all the multitud thereof.

7:15 the sword is without, and the pestil and the famin within:
h that is in the field shall die with the sword; and he that is in
th city, famin and pestil shall devour him.

7:16 but they that escap of them shall escape, and shall be on the
mountain like dove of the valleys, all of them mourning, everi one
for hi iniquity.

7:17 all hand shall be feeble, and all knee shall be weak as water.

7:18 they shall also gird themselv with sackcloth, and horror shall
cov them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and bald upon all
their heads.

7:19 they shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall
b removed: their silver and their gold shall not be abl to deliver
them in the day of the wrath of the lord: they shall not satisfi their
souls, neither fill their bowels: becaus it is the stumblingblock of
their iniquity.

7:20 As for the beauti of hi ornament, he set it in majesty: but they
mad the imag of their abomin and of their detest things
therein: therefor have I set it far from them.

7:21 and I will give it into the hand of the stranger for a prey,
and to the wick of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollut it.

7:22 My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollut my
secret place: for the robber shall enter into it, and defil it.

7:23 make a chain: for the land is full of bloodi crimes, and the city
i full of violence.

7:24 wherefor I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall
possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to
cease; and their holi place shall be defiled.

7:25 destruct cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be
none.

7:26 mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon
rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet; but the law
shal perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients.

7:27 the king shall mourn, and the princ shall be cloth with
desolation, and the hand of the peopl of the land shall be troubled:
i will do unto them after their way, and accord to their deserts
wil I judg them; and they shall know that I am the lord.

8:1 and it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the
fifth day of the month, as I sat in mine house, and the elder of
judah sat befor me, that the hand of the lord god fell there upon me.

8:2 then I beheld, and lo a like as the appear of fire: from
th appear of hi loin even downward, fire; and from hi loins
even upward, as the appear of brightness, as the colour of amber.

8:3 and he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of
min head; and the spirit lift me up between the earth and the
heaven, and brought me in the vision of god to jerusalem, to the door
of the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where wa the seat of
th imag of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.

8:4 and, behold, the glori of the god of israel wa there, according
to the vision that I saw in the plain.

8:5 then said he unto me, son of man, lift up thine eye now the way
toward the north. So I lift up mine eye the way toward the north,
and behold northward at the gate of the altar thi imag of jealousy
in the entry.

8:6 He said furthermor unto me, son of man, seest thou what they do?
even the great abomin that the hous of israel committeth here,
that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again,
and thou shalt see greater abominations.

8:7 and he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked,
behold a hole in the wall.

8:8 then said he unto me, son of man, dig now in the wall: and when i
had dig in the wall, behold a door.

8:9 and he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wick abominations
that they do here.

8:10 So I went in and saw; and behold everi form of creep things,
and abomin beasts, and all the idol of the hous of israel,
pourtray upon the wall round about.

8:11 and there stood befor them seventi men of the ancient of the
hous of israel, and in the midst of them stood jaazaniah the son of
shaphan, with everi man hi censer in hi hand; and a thick cloud of
incens went up.

8:12 then said he unto me, son of man, hast thou seen what the
anci of the hous of israel do in the dark, everi man in the
chamb of hi imagery? for they say, the lord seeth us not; the lord
hath forsaken the earth.

8:13 He said also unto me, turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see
great abomin that they do.

8:14 then he brought me to the door of the gate of the lord' house
which wa toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weep for
tammuz.

8:15 then said he unto me, hast thou seen this, O son of man? turn
the yet again, and thou shalt see greater abomin than these.

8:16 and he brought me into the inner court of the lord' house, and,
behold, at the door of the templ of the lord, between the porch and
th altar, were about five and twenti men, with their back toward the
templ of the lord, and their face toward the east; and they
worship the sun toward the east.

8:17 then he said unto me, hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a
light thing to the hous of judah that they commit the abominations
which they commit here? for they have fill the land with violence,
and have return to provok me to anger: and, lo, they put the branch
to their nose.

8:18 therefor will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare,
neith will I have pity: and though they cri in mine ear with a loud
voice, yet will I not hear them.

9:1 He cri also in mine ear with a loud voice, saying, caus them
that have charg over the citi to draw near, even everi man with his
destroy weapon in hi hand.

9:2 and, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which
lieth toward the north, and everi man a slaughter weapon in hi hand;
and one man among them wa cloth with linen, with a writer' inkhorn
bi hi side: and they went in, and stood besid the brasen altar.

9:3 and the glori of the god of israel wa gone up from the cherub,
whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. and he call to the
man cloth with linen, which had the writer' inkhorn by hi side;
9:4 and the lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city,
through the midst of jerusalem, and set a mark upon the forehead of
th men that sigh and that cri for all the abomin that be done
in the midst thereof.

9:5 and to the other he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through
th city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity: 9:6
slay utterli old and young, both maids, and littl children, and
women: but come not near ani man upon whom is the mark; and begin at
mi sanctuary. then they began at the ancient men which were befor the
house.

9:7 and he said unto them, defil the house, and fill the court with
th slain: go ye forth. and they went forth, and slew in the city.

9:8 and it came to pass, while they were slay them, and I wa left,
that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah lord god! wilt thou
destroy all the residu of israel in thi pour out of thi furi upon
jerusalem?  9:9 then said he unto me, the iniqu of the hous of
israel and judah is exceed great, and the land is full of blood,
and the citi full of perverseness: for they say, the lord hath
forsaken the earth, and the lord seeth not.

9:10 and as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have
pity, but I will recompens their way upon their head.

9:11 and, behold, the man cloth with linen, which had the inkhorn by
hi side, report the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast
command me.

10:1 then I looked, and, behold, in the firmament that wa abov the
head of the cherubim there appear over them as it were a sapphire
stone, as the appear of the like of a throne.

10:2 and he spake unto the man cloth with linen, and said, Go in
between the wheels, even under the cherub, and fill thine hand with
coal of fire from between the cherubims, and scatter them over the
city. and he went in in my sight.

10:3 now the cherubim stood on the right side of the house, when the
man went in; and the cloud fill the inner court.

10:4 then the glori of the lord went up from the cherub, and stood
ov the threshold of the house; and the hous wa fill with the
cloud, and the court wa full of the bright of the lord' glory.

10:5 and the sound of the cherubims' wing wa heard even to the outer
court, as the voic of the almighti god when he speaketh.

10:6 and it came to pass, that when he had command the man clothed
with linen, saying, take fire from between the wheels, from between
th cherubims; then he went in, and stood besid the wheels.

10:7 and one cherub stretch forth hi hand from between the
cherubim unto the fire that wa between the cherubims, and took
thereof, and put it into the hand of him that wa cloth with linen:
who took it, and went out.

10:8 and there appear in the cherubim the form of a man' hand
und their wings.

10:9 and when I looked, behold the four wheel by the cherubims, one
wheel by one cherub, and anoth wheel by anoth cherub: and the
appear of the wheel wa as the colour of a beryl stone.

10:10 and as for their appearances, they four had one likeness, as if
a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.

10:11 when they went, they went upon their four sides; they turn not
a they went, but to the place whither the head look they followed
it; they turn not as they went.

10:12 and their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and
their wings, and the wheels, were full of eye round about, even the
wheel that they four had.

10:13 As for the wheels, it wa cri unto them in my hearing, o
wheel.

10:14 and everi one had four faces: the first face wa the face of a
cherub, and the second face wa the face of a man, and the third the
fac of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.

10:15 and the cherubim were lift up. thi is the live creature
that I saw by the river of chebar.

10:16 and when the cherubim went, the wheel went by them: and when
th cherubim lift up their wing to mount up from the earth, the
sam wheel also turn not from besid them.

10:17 when they stood, these stood; and when they were lift up,
thes lift up themselv also: for the spirit of the live creature
wa in them.

10:18 then the glori of the lord depart from off the threshold of
th house, and stood over the cherubims.

10:19 and the cherubim lift up their wings, and mount up from the
earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheel also were beside
them, and everi one stood at the door of the east gate of the lord's
house; and the glori of the god of israel wa over them above.

10:20 thi is the live creatur that I saw under the god of israel
bi the river of chebar; and I knew that they were the cherubims.

10:21 everi one had four face apiece, and everi one four wings; and
th like of the hand of a man wa under their wings.

10:22 and the like of their face wa the same face which I saw
bi the river of chebar, their appear and themselves: they went
everi one straight forward.

11:1 moreov the spirit lift me up, and brought me unto the east
gat of the lord' house, which looketh eastward: and behold at the
door of the gate five and twenti men; among whom I saw jaazaniah the
son of azur, and pelatiah the son of benaiah, princ of the people.

11:2 then said he unto me, son of man, these are the men that devise
mischief, and give wick counsel in thi city: 11:3 which say, It is
not near; let us build houses: thi citi is the caldron, and we be the
flesh.

11:4 therefor prophesi against them, prophesy, O son of man.

11:5 and the spirit of the lord fell upon me, and said unto me, speak;
thu saith the lord; thu have ye said, O hous of israel: for I know
th thing that come into your mind, everi one of them.

11:6 Ye have multipli your slain in thi city, and ye have filled
th street thereof with the slain.

11:7 therefor thu saith the lord god; your slain whom ye have laid
in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and thi citi is the caldron:
but I will bring you forth out of the midst of it.

11:8 Ye have fear the sword; and I will bring a sword upon you,
saith the lord god.

11:9 and I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliv you
into the hand of strangers, and will execut judgment among you.

11:10 Ye shall fall by the sword; I will judg you in the border of
israel; and ye shall know that I am the lord.

11:11 thi citi shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the
flesh in the midst thereof; but I will judg you in the border of
israel: 11:12 and ye shall know that I am the lord: for ye have not
walk in my statutes, neither execut my judgments, but have done
aft the manner of the heathen that are round about you.

11:13 and it came to pass, when I prophesied, that pelatiah the son of
benaiah died. then fell I down upon my face, and cri with a loud
voice, and said, Ah lord god! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant
of israel?  11:14 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying,
11:15 son of man, thi brethren, even thi brethren, the men of thy
kindred, and all the hous of israel wholly, are they unto whom the
inhabit of jerusalem have said, get you far from the lord: unto us
i thi land given in possession.

11:16 therefor say, thu saith the lord god; although I have cast
them far off among the heathen, and although I have scatter them
among the countries, yet will I be to them as a littl sanctuari in
th countri where they shall come.

11:17 therefor say, thu saith the lord god; I will even gather you
from the people, and assembl you out of the countri where ye have
been scattered, and I will give you the land of israel.

11:18 and they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the
detest thing thereof and all the abomin thereof from
thence.

11:19 and I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit
within you; and I will take the stoni heart out of their flesh, and
wil give them an heart of flesh: 11:20 that they may walk in my
statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my
people, and I will be their god.

11:21 but as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their
detest thing and their abominations, I will recompens their way
upon their own heads, saith the lord god.

11:22 then did the cherubim lift up their wings, and the wheels
besid them; and the glori of the god of israel wa over them above.

11:23 and the glori of the lord went up from the midst of the city,
and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.

11:24 afterward the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by
th spirit of god into chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the
vis that I had seen went up from me.

11:25 then I spake unto them of the captiv all the thing that the
lord had shew me.

12:1 the word of the lord also came unto me, saying, 12:2 son of man,
thou dwellest in the midst of a rebelli house, which have eye to
see, and see not; they have ear to hear, and hear not: for they are a
rebelli house.

12:3 therefore, thou son of man, prepar thee stuff for removing, and
remov by day in their sight; and thou shalt remov from thi place to
anoth place in their sight: it may be they will consider, though
they be a rebelli house.

12:4 then shalt thou bring forth thi stuff by day in their sight, as
stuff for removing: and thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, as
they that go forth into captivity.

12:5 dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carri out thereby.

12:6 In their sight shalt thou bear it upon thi shoulders, and carry
it forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thi face, that thou see not
th ground: for I have set thee for a sign unto the hous of israel.

12:7 and I did so as I wa commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day,
a stuff for captivity, and in the even I dig through the wall with
min hand; I brought it forth in the twilight, and I bare it upon my
should in their sight.

12:8 and in the morn came the word of the lord unto me, saying,
12:9 son of man, hath not the hous of israel, the rebelli house,
said unto thee, what doest thou?  12:10 say thou unto them, thu saith
th lord god; thi burden concerneth the princ in jerusalem, and all
th hous of israel that are among them.

12:11 say, I am your sign: like as I have done, so shall it be done
unto them: they shall remov and go into captivity.

12:12 and the princ that is among them shall bear upon hi shoulder
in the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall
to carri out thereby: he shall cover hi face, that he see not the
ground with hi eyes.

12:13 My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare: and I will bring him to babylon to the land of the chaldeans;
yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there.

12:14 and I will scatter toward everi wind all that are about him to
help him, and all hi bands; and I will draw out the sword after them.

12:15 and they shall know that I am the lord, when I shall scatter
them among the nations, and dispers them in the countries.

12:16 but I will leav a few men of them from the sword, from the
famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declar all their
abomin among the heathen whither they come; and they shall know
that I am the lord.

12:17 moreov the word of the lord came to me, saying, 12:18 son of
man, eat thi bread with quaking, and drink thi water with trembling
and with carefulness; 12:19 and say unto the peopl of the land, thus
saith the lord god of the inhabit of jerusalem, and of the land of
israel; they shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their
wat with astonishment, that her land may be desol from all that
i therein, becaus of the violenc of all them that dwell therein.

12:20 and the citi that are inhabit shall be laid waste, and the
land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I am the lord.

12:21 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 12:22 son of man,
what is that proverb that ye have in the land of israel, saying, the
day are prolonged, and everi vision faileth?  12:23 tell them
therefore, thu saith the lord god; I will make thi proverb to cease,
and they shall no more use it as a proverb in israel; but say unto
them, the day are at hand, and the effect of everi vision.

12:24 for there shall be no more ani vain vision nor flattering
divin within the hous of israel.

12:25 for I am the lord: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak
shal come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, o
rebelli house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the
lord god.

12:26 again the word of the lord came to me, saying.

12:27 son of man, behold, they of the hous of israel say, the vision
that he seeth is for mani day to come, and he prophesieth of the
tim that are far off.

12:28 therefor say unto them, thu saith the lord god; there shall
non of my word be prolong ani more, but the word which I have
spoken shall be done, saith the lord god.

13:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 13:2 son of man,
prophesi against the prophet of israel that prophesy, and say thou
unto them that prophesi out of their own hearts, hear ye the word of
th lord; 13:3 thu saith the lord god; woe unto the foolish prophets,
that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!  13:4 O israel,
thi prophet are like the fox in the deserts.

13:5 Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedg for
th hous of israel to stand in the battl in the day of the lord.

13:6 they have seen vaniti and lie divination, saying, the lord
saith: and the lord hath not sent them: and they have made other to
hop that they would confirm the word.

13:7 have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying
divination, wherea ye say, the lord saith it; albeit I have not
spoken?  13:8 therefor thu saith the lord god; becaus ye have
spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you,
saith the lord god.

13:9 and mine hand shall be upon the prophet that see vanity, and
that divin lies: they shall not be in the assembl of my people,
neith shall they be written in the write of the hous of israel,
neith shall they enter into the land of israel; and ye shall know
that I am the lord god.

13:10 because, even becaus they have seduc my people, saying,
peace; and there wa no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo,
oth daub it with untemp morter: 13:11 say unto them which
daub it with untemp morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an
overflow shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a
stormi wind shall rend it.

13:12 lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you,
wher is the daub wherewith ye have daub it?  13:13 therefore
thu saith the lord god; I will even rend it with a stormi wind in my
fury; and there shall be an overflow shower in mine anger, and
great hailston in my furi to consum it.

13:14 So will I break down the wall that ye have daub with
untemp morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the
found thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye
shal be consum in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that I am
th lord.

13:15 thu will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them
that have daub it with untemp morter, and will say unto you, the
wal is no more, neither they that daub it; 13:16 To wit, the
prophet of israel which prophesi concern jerusalem, and which see
vis of peac for her, and there is no peace, saith the lord god.

13:17 likewise, thou son of man, set thi face against the daughter of
thi people, which prophesi out of their own heart; and prophesi thou
against them, 13:18 and say, thu saith the lord god; woe to the women
that sew pillow to all armholes, and make kerchief upon the head of
everi statur to hunt souls! will ye hunt the soul of my people, and
wil ye save the soul aliv that come unto you?  13:19 and will ye
pollut me among my peopl for hand of barley and for piec of
bread, to slay the soul that should not die, and to save the souls
al that should not live, by your lie to my peopl that hear your
lies?  13:20 wherefor thu saith the lord god; behold, I am against
your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the soul to make them fly, and
i will tear them from your arms, and will let the soul go, even the
soul that ye hunt to make them fly.

13:21 your kerchief also will I tear, and deliv my peopl out of
your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye
shal know that I am the lord.

13:22 becaus with lie ye have made the heart of the righteou sad,
whom I have not made sad; and strengthen the hand of the wicked,
that he should not return from hi wick way, by promis him life:
13:23 therefor ye shall see no more vanity, nor divin divinations:
for I will deliv my peopl out of your hand: and ye shall know that
i am the lord.

14:1 then came certain of the elder of israel unto me, and sat before
me.

14:2 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 14:3 son of man,
thes men have set up their idol in their heart, and put the
stumblingblock of their iniqu befor their face: should I be
enquir of at all by them?  14:4 therefor speak unto them, and say
unto them, thu saith the lord god; everi man of the hous of israel
that setteth up hi idol in hi heart, and putteth the stumblingblock
of hi iniqu befor hi face, and cometh to the prophet; I the lord
wil answer him that cometh accord to the multitud of hi idols;
14:5 that I may take the hous of israel in their own heart, because
they are all estrang from me through their idols.

14:6 therefor say unto the hous of israel, thu saith the lord god;
repent, and turn yourselv from your idols; and turn away your faces
from all your abominations.

14:7 for everi one of the hous of israel, or of the stranger that
sojourneth in israel, which separateth himself from me, and setteth up
hi idol in hi heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of hi iniquity
befor hi face, and cometh to a prophet to enquir of him concerning
me; I the lord will answer him by myself: 14:8 and I will set my face
against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will
cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am
th lord.

14:9 and if the prophet be deceiv when he hath spoken a thing, I the
lord have deceiv that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon
him, and will destroy him from the midst of my peopl israel.

14:10 and they shall bear the punish of their iniquity: the
punish of the prophet shall be even as the punish of him that
seeketh unto him; 14:11 that the hous of israel may go no more astray
from me, neither be pollut ani more with all their transgressions;
but that they may be my people, and I may be their god, saith the lord
god.

14:12 the word of the lord came again to me, saying, 14:13 son of man,
when the land sinneth against me by trespass grievously, then will
i stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famin upon it, and will cut off man and beast
from it: 14:14 though these three men, noah, daniel, and job, were in
it, they should deliv but their own soul by their righteousness,
saith the lord god.

14:15 If I caus noisom beast to pass through the land, and they
spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because
of the beasts: 14:16 though these three men were in it, as I live,
saith the lord god, they shall deliv neither son nor daughters;
they onli shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

14:17 Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say, sword, go through
th land; so that I cut off man and beast from it: 14:18 though these
thre men were in it, as I live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliv neither son nor daughters, but they onli shall be delivered
themselves.

14:19 Or if I send a pestil into that land, and pour out my fury
upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast: 14:20 though noah,
daniel, and job were in it, as I live, saith the lord god, they shall
deliv neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliv their own
soul by their righteousness.

14:21 for thu saith the lord god; how much more when I send my four
sor judgment upon jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the
noisom beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?
14:22 yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be
brought forth, both son and daughters: behold, they shall come forth
unto you, and ye shall see their way and their doings: and ye shall be
comfort concern the evil that I have brought upon jerusalem, even
concern all that I have brought upon it.

14:23 and they shall comfort you, when ye see their way and their
doings: and ye shall know that I have not done without caus all that
i have done in it, saith the lord god.

15:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 15:2 son of man,
what is the vine tree more than ani tree, or than a branch which is
among the tree of the forest?  15:3 shall wood be taken thereof to do
ani work? or will men take a pin of it to hang ani vessel thereon?
15:4 behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth
both the end of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it meet for any
work?  15:5 behold, when it wa whole, it wa meet for no work: how
much less shall it be meet yet for ani work, when the fire hath
devour it, and it is burned?  15:6 therefor thu saith the lord
god; As the vine tree among the tree of the forest, which I have
given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabit of
jerusalem.

15:7 and I will set my face against them; they shall go out from one
fire, and anoth fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am
th lord, when I set my face against them.

15:8 and I will make the land desolate, becaus they have commit a
trespass, saith the lord god.

16:1 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 16:2 son of man,
caus jerusalem to know her abominations, 16:3 and say, thu saith the
lord god unto jerusalem; thi birth and thi nativ is of the land of
canaan; thi father wa an amorite, and thi mother an hittite.

16:4 and as for thi nativity, in the day thou wast born thi navel was
not cut, neither wast thou wash in water to suppl thee; thou wast
not salt at all, nor swaddl at all.

16:5 none eye piti thee, to do ani of these unto thee, to have
compass upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the
loth of thi person, in the day that thou wast born.

16:6 and when I pass by thee, and saw thee pollut in thine own
blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thi blood, live; yea, I said
unto thee when thou wast in thi blood, live.

16:7 I have caus thee to multipli as the bud of the field, and thou
hast increas and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent
ornaments: thi breast are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas
th wast nake and bare.

16:8 now when I pass by thee, and look upon thee, behold, thi time
wa the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and cover thy
nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and enter into a coven with
thee, saith the lord god, and thou becamest mine.

16:9 then wash I thee with water; yea, I throughli wash away thy
blood from thee, and I anoint thee with oil.

16:10 I cloth thee also with broider work, and shod thee with
badgers' skin, and I gird thee about with fine linen, and I covered
the with silk.

16:11 I deck thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelet upon thy
hands, and a chain on thi neck.

16:12 and I put a jewel on thi forehead, and ear in thine ears,
and a beauti crown upon thine head.

16:13 thu wast thou deck with gold and silver; and thi raiment was
of fine linen, and silk, and broider work; thou didst eat fine
flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceed beautiful, and thou
didst prosper into a kingdom.

16:14 and thi renown went forth among the heathen for thi beauty: for
it wa perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith
th lord god.

16:15 but thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the
harlot becaus of thi renown, and pouredst out thi fornic on
everi one that pass by; hi it was.

16:16 and of thi garment thou didst take, and deckedst thi high
plac with diver colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: the
lik thing shall not come, neither shall it be so.

16:17 thou hast also taken thi fair jewel of my gold and of my
silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself imag of men,
and didst commit whoredom with them, 16:18 and tookest thi broidered
garments, and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine
incens befor them.

16:19 My meat also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey,
wherewith I fed thee, thou hast even set it befor them for a sweet
savour: and thu it was, saith the lord god.

16:20 moreov thou hast taken thi son and thi daughters, whom thou
hast born unto me, and these hast thou sacrif unto them to be
devoured. Is thi of thi whoredom a small matter, 16:21 that thou
hast slain my children, and deliv them to caus them to pass
through the fire for them?  16:22 and in all thine abomin and
thi whoredom thou hast not rememb the day of thi youth, when
thou wast nake and bare, and wast pollut in thi blood.

16:23 and it came to pass after all thi wickedness, (woe, woe unto
thee!  saith the lord god;) 16:24 that thou hast also built unto thee
an emin place, and hast made thee an high place in everi street.

16:25 thou hast built thi high place at everi head of the way, and
hast made thi beauti to be abhorred, and hast open thi feet to every
on that pass by, and multipli thi whoredoms.

16:26 thou hast also commit fornic with the egyptian thy
neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increas thi whoredoms, to
provok me to anger.

16:27 behold, therefor I have stretch out my hand over thee, and
hav diminish thine ordinari food, and deliv thee unto the will
of them that hate thee, the daughter of the philistines, which are
asham of thi lewd way.

16:28 thou hast play the whore also with the assyrians, becaus thou
wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast play the harlot with them, and yet
couldest not be satisfied.

16:29 thou hast moreov multipli thi fornic in the land of
canaan unto chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfi therewith.

16:30 how weak is thine heart, saith the lord god, see thou doest
al these things, the work of an imperi whorish woman; 16:31 in
that thou buildest thine emin place in the head of everi way, and
makest thine high place in everi street; and hast not been as an
harlot, in that thou scornest hire; 16:32 but as a wife that
committeth adultery, which taketh stranger instead of her husband!
16:33 they give gift to all whores: but thou givest thi gift to all
thi lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every
sid for thi whoredom.

16:34 and the contrari is in thee from other women in thi whoredoms,
wherea none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou
givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefor thou art
contrary.

16:35 wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the lord: 16:36 thu saith
th lord god; becaus thi filthi wa pour out, and thi nakedness
discov through thi whoredom with thi lovers, and with all the
idol of thi abominations, and by the blood of thi children, which
thou didst give unto them; 16:37 behold, therefor I will gather all
thi lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou
hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather
them round about against thee, and will discov thi naked unto
them, that they may see all thi nakedness.

16:38 and I will judg thee, as women that break wedlock and shed
blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in furi and jealousy.

16:39 and I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw
down thine emin place, and shall break down thi high places: they
shal strip thee also of thi clothes, and shall take thi fair jewels,
and leav thee nake and bare.

16:40 they shall also bring up a compani against thee, and they shall
ston thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.

16:41 and they shall burn thine hous with fire, and execute
judg upon thee in the sight of mani women: and I will caus thee
to ceas from play the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any
more.

16:42 So will I make my furi toward thee to rest, and my jealousy
shal depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more
angry.

16:43 becaus thou hast not rememb the day of thi youth, but hast
fret me in all these things; behold, therefor I also will
recompens thi way upon thine head, saith the lord god: and thou shalt
not commit thi lewd abov all thine abominations.

16:44 behold, everi one that useth proverb shall use thi proverb
against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter.

16:45 thou art thi mother' daughter, that lotheth her husband and her
children; and thou art the sister of thi sisters, which loth their
husband and their children: your mother wa an hittite, and your
fath an amorite.

16:46 and thine elder sister is samaria, she and her daughter that
dwel at thi left hand: and thi younger sister, that dwelleth at thy
right hand, is sodom and her daughters.

16:47 yet hast thou not walk after their ways, nor done after their
abominations: but, as if that were a veri littl thing, thou wast
corrupt more than they in all thi ways.

16:48 As I live, saith the lord god, sodom thi sister hath not done,
sh nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thi daughters.

16:49 behold, thi wa the iniqu of thi sister sodom, pride,
 of bread, and abund of idl wa in her and in her
daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

16:50 and they were haughty, and commit abomin befor me:
therefor I took them away as I saw good.

16:51 neither hath samaria commit half of thi sins; but thou hast
multipli thine abomin more than they, and hast justifi thy
sist in all thine abomin which thou hast done.

16:52 thou also, which hast judg thi sisters, bear thine own shame
for thi sin that thou hast commit more abomin than they: they
ar more righteou than thou: yea, be thou confound also, and bear
thi shame, in that thou hast justifi thi sisters.

16:53 when I shall bring again their captivity, the captiv of sodom
and her daughters, and the captiv of samaria and her daughters,
then will I bring again the captiv of thi captiv in the midst of
them: 16:54 that thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be
confound in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto
them.

16:55 when thi sisters, sodom and her daughters, shall return to their
form estate, and samaria and her daughter shall return to their
form estate, then thou and thi daughter shall return to your former
estate.

16:56 for thi sister sodom wa not mention by thi mouth in the day
of thi pride, 16:57 befor thi wicked wa discovered, as at the
tim of thi reproach of the daughter of syria, and all that are round
about her, the daughter of the philistines, which despis thee round
about.

16:58 thou hast born thi lewd and thine abominations, saith the
lord.

16:59 for thu saith the lord god; I will even deal with thee as thou
hast done, which hast despis the oath in break the covenant.

16:60 nevertheless I will rememb my coven with thee in the days
of thi youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlast covenant.

16:61 then thou shalt rememb thi ways, and be ashamed, when thou
shalt receiv thi sisters, thine elder and thi younger: and I will
giv them unto thee for daughters, but not by thi covenant.

16:62 and I will establish my coven with thee; and thou shalt know
that I am the lord: 16:63 that thou mayest remember, and be
confounded, and never open thi mouth ani more becaus of thi shame,
when I am pacifi toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the
lord god.

17:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 17:2 son of man,
put forth a riddle, and speak a parabl unto the hous of israel; 17:3
and say, thu saith the lord god; A great eagl with great wings,
longwinged, full of feathers, which had diver colours, came unto
lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar: 17:4 He crop off
th top of hi young twigs, and carri it into a land of traffick; he
set it in a citi of merchants.

17:5 He took also of the seed of the land, and plant it in a
fruit field; he place it by great waters, and set it as a willow
tree.

17:6 and it grew, and becam a spread vine of low stature, whose
branch turn toward him, and the root thereof were under him: so
it becam a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.

17:7 there wa also anoth great eagl with great wing and many
feathers: and, behold, thi vine did bend her root toward him, and
shot forth her branch toward him, that he might water it by the
furrow of her plantation.

17:8 It wa plant in a good soil by great waters, that it might
br forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a
goodli vine.

17:9 say thou, thu saith the lord god; shall it prosper? shall he not
pul up the root thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it
wither? it shall wither in all the leav of her spring, even without
great power or mani peopl to pluck it up by the root thereof.

17:10 yea, behold, be planted, shall it prosper? shall it not
utterli wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shall wither in the
furrow where it grew.

17:11 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 17:12 say
now to the rebelli house, know ye not what these thing mean?  tell
them, behold, the king of babylon is come to jerusalem, and hath taken
th king thereof, and the princ thereof, and led them with him to
babylon; 17:13 and hath taken of the king' seed, and made a covenant
with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty
of the land: 17:14 that the kingdom might be base, that it might not
lift itself up, but that by keep of hi coven it might stand.

17:15 but he rebel against him in send hi ambassador into
egypt, that they might give him hors and much people. shall he
prosper? shall he escap that doeth such things? or shall he break the
covenant, and be delivered?  17:16 As I live, saith the lord god,
sur in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose
oath he despised, and whose coven he brake, even with him in the
midst of babylon he shall die.

17:17 neither shall pharaoh with hi mighti armi and great company
mak for him in the war, by cast up mounts, and build forts, to
cut off mani persons: 17:18 see he despis the oath by breaking
th covenant, when, lo, he had given hi hand, and hath done all these
things, he shall not escape.

17:19 therefor thu saith the lord god; As I live, sure mine oath
that he hath despised, and my coven that he hath broken, even it
wil I recompens upon hi own head.

17:20 and I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare, and I will bring him to babylon, and will plead with him there
for hi trespass that he hath trespass against me.

17:21 and all hi fugit with all hi band shall fall by the
sword, and they that remain shall be scatter toward all winds: and
y shall know that I the lord have spoken it.

17:22 thu saith the lord god; I will also take of the highest branch
of the high cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the top of
hi young twig a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain
and eminent: 17:23 In the mountain of the height of israel will i
plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a
goodli cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of everi wing; in the
shadow of the branch thereof shall they dwell.

17:24 and all the tree of the field shall know that I the lord have
brought down the high tree, have exalt the low tree, have dri up
th green tree, and have made the dri tree to flourish: I the lord
hav spoken and have done it.

18:1 the word of the lord came unto me again, saying, 18:2 what mean
ye, that ye use thi proverb concern the land of israel, saying,
th father have eaten sour grapes, and the children' teeth are set
on edge?  18:3 As I live, saith the lord god, ye shall not have
occas ani more to use thi proverb in israel.

18:4 behold, all soul are mine; as the soul of the father, so also
th soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.

18:5 but if a man be just, and do that which is law and right, 18:6
and hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lift up hi eyes
to the idol of the hous of israel, neither hath defil his
neighbour' wife, neither hath come near to a menstruou woman, 18:7
and hath not oppress any, but hath restor to the debtor his
pledge, hath spoil none by violence, hath given hi bread to the
hungry, and hath cover the nake with a garment; 18:8 He that hath
not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken ani increase, that hath
withdrawn hi hand from iniquity, hath execut true judgment between
man and man, 18:9 hath walk in my statutes, and hath kept my
judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shall sure live, saith the
lord god.

18:10 If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that
doeth the like to ani one of these things, 18:11 and that doeth not
ani of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and
defil hi neighbour' wife, 18:12 hath oppress the poor and needy,
hath spoil by violence, hath not restor the pledge, and hath
lift up hi eye to the idols, hath commit abomination, 18:13
hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then
live? he shall not live: he hath done all these abominations; he shall
sur die; hi blood shall be upon him.

18:14 now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all hi father' sins
which he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like, 18:15
that hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lift up his
ey to the idol of the hous of israel, hath not defil his
neighbour' wife, 18:16 neither hath oppress any, hath not
withholden the pledge, neither hath spoil by violence, but hath
given hi bread to the hungry, and hath cover the nake with a
garment, 18:17 that hath taken off hi hand from the poor, that hath
not receiv usuri nor increase, hath execut my judgments, hath
walk in my statutes; he shall not die for the iniqu of his
father, he shall sure live.

18:18 As for hi father, becaus he cruelli oppressed, spoil his
broth by violence, and did that which is not good among hi people,
lo, even he shall die in hi iniquity.

18:19 yet say ye, why? doth not the son bear the iniqu of the
father?  when the son hath done that which is law and right, and
hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall sure live.

18:20 the soul that sinneth, it shall die. the son shall not bear the
iniqu of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniqu of
th son: the righteous of the righteou shall be upon him, and the
wicked of the wick shall be upon him.

18:21 but if the wick will turn from all hi sin that he hath
committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is law and
right, he shall sure live, he shall not die.

18:22 all hi transgress that he hath committed, they shall not be
ment unto him: in hi righteous that he hath done he shall
live.

18:23 have I ani pleasur at all that the wick should die? saith the
lord god: and not that he should return from hi ways, and live?
18:24 but when the righteou turneth away from hi righteousness, and
committeth iniquity, and doeth accord to all the abomin that
th wick man doeth, shall he live? all hi righteous that he
hath done shall not be mentioned: in hi trespass that he hath
trespassed, and in hi sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.

18:25 yet ye say, the way of the lord is not equal. hear now, O house
of israel; Is not my way equal? are not your way unequal?  18:26 when
a righteou man turneth away from hi righteousness, and committeth
iniquity, and dieth in them; for hi iniqu that he hath done shall
h die.

18:27 again, when the wick man turneth away from hi wicked that
h hath committed, and doeth that which is law and right, he shall
sav hi soul alive.

18:28 becaus he considereth, and turneth away from all his
transgress that he hath committed, he shall sure live, he shall
not die.

18:29 yet saith the hous of israel, the way of the lord is not equal.
o hous of israel, are not my way equal? are not your way unequal?
18:30 therefor I will judg you, O hous of israel, everi one
accord to hi ways, saith the lord god. repent, and turn yourselves
from all your transgressions; so iniqu shall not be your ruin.

18:31 cast away from you all your transgressions, wherebi ye have
transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for whi will
y die, O hous of israel?  18:32 for I have no pleasur in the death
of him that dieth, saith the lord god: wherefor turn yourselves, and
liv ye.

19:1 moreov take thou up a lament for the princ of israel,
19:2 and say, what is thi mother? A lioness: she lay down among lions,
sh nourish her whelp among young lions.

19:3 and she brought up one of her whelps: it becam a young lion, and
it learn to catch the prey; it devour men.

19:4 the nation also heard of him; he wa taken in their pit, and
they brought him with chain unto the land of egypt.

19:5 now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope wa lost, then
sh took anoth of her whelps, and made him a young lion.

19:6 and he went up and down among the lions, he becam a young lion,
and learn to catch the prey, and devour men.

19:7 and he knew their desol palaces, and he laid wast their
cities; and the land wa desolate, and the ful thereof, by the
nois of hi roaring.

19:8 then the nation set against him on everi side from the
provinces, and spread their net over him: he wa taken in their pit.

19:9 and they put him in ward in chains, and brought him to the king
of babylon: they brought him into holds, that hi voic should no more
b heard upon the mountain of israel.

19:10 thi mother is like a vine in thi blood, plant by the waters:
sh wa fruit and full of branch by reason of mani waters.

19:11 and she had strong rod for the sceptr of them that bare rule,
and her statur wa exalt among the thick branches, and she appeared
in her height with the multitud of her branches.

19:12 but she wa pluck up in fury, she wa cast down to the ground,
and the east wind dri up her fruit: her strong rod were broken and
withered; the fire consum them.

19:13 and now she is plant in the wilderness, in a dri and thirsty
ground.

19:14 and fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath
devour her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a sceptr to
rule. thi is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

20:1 and it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the
tenth day of the month, that certain of the elder of israel came to
enquir of the lord, and sat befor me.

20:2 then came the word of the lord unto me, saying, 20:3 son of man,
speak unto the elder of israel, and say unto them, thu saith the
lord god; are ye come to enquir of me? As I live, saith the lord god,
i will not be enquir of by you.

20:4 wilt thou judg them, son of man, wilt thou judg them? cause
them to know the abomin of their fathers: 20:5 and say unto
them, thu saith the lord god; In the day when I chose israel, and
lift up mine hand unto the seed of the hous of jacob, and made
myself known unto them in the land of egypt, when I lift up mine
hand unto them, saying, I am the lord your god; 20:6 In the day that i
lift up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of
egypt into a land that I had espi for them, flow with milk and
honey, which is the glori of all lands: 20:7 then said I unto them,
cast ye away everi man the abomin of hi eyes, and defil not
yourselv with the idol of egypt: I am the lord your god.

20:8 but they rebel against me, and would not hearken unto me: they
did not everi man cast away the abomin of their eyes, neither
did they forsak the idol of egypt: then I said, I will pour out my
furi upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of
th land of egypt.

20:9 but I wrought for my name' sake, that it should not be polluted
befor the heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself
known unto them, in bring them forth out of the land of egypt.

20:10 wherefor I caus them to go forth out of the land of egypt,
and brought them into the wilderness.

20:11 and I gave them my statutes, and shew them my judgments, which
if a man do, he shall even live in them.

20:12 moreov also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me
and them, that they might know that I am the lord that sanctifi them.

20:13 but the hous of israel rebel against me in the wilderness:
they walk not in my statutes, and they despis my judgments, which
if a man do, he shall even live in them; and my sabbath they greatly
polluted: then I said, I would pour out my furi upon them in the
wilderness, to consum them.

20:14 but I wrought for my name' sake, that it should not be polluted
befor the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out.

20:15 yet also I lift up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that i
would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing
with milk and honey, which is the glori of all lands; 20:16 because
they despis my judgments, and walk not in my statutes, but
pollut my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols.

20:17 nevertheless mine eye spare them from destroy them, neither
did I make an end of them in the wilderness.

20:18 but I said unto their children in the wilderness, walk ye not in
th statut of your fathers, neither observ their judgments, nor
defil yourselv with their idols: 20:19 I am the lord your god; walk
in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; 20:20 and hallow
mi sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may
know that I am the lord your god.

20:21 notwithstand the children rebel against me: they walked
not in my statutes, neither kept my judgment to do them, which if a
man do, he shall even live in them; they pollut my sabbaths: then i
said, I would pour out my furi upon them, to accomplish my anger
against them in the wilderness.

20:22 nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name's
sake, that it should not be pollut in the sight of the heathen, in
whos sight I brought them forth.

20:23 I lift up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness, that i
would scatter them among the heathen, and dispers them through the
countries; 20:24 becaus they had not execut my judgments, but had
despis my statutes, and had pollut my sabbaths, and their eyes
wer after their fathers' idols.

20:25 wherefor I gave them also statut that were not good, and
judg wherebi they should not live; 20:26 and I pollut them in
their own gifts, in that they caus to pass through the fire all that
openeth the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that
they might know that I am the lord.

20:27 therefore, son of man, speak unto the hous of israel, and say
unto them, thu saith the lord god; yet in thi your father have
blasphem me, in that they have commit a trespass against me.

20:28 for when I had brought them into the land, for the which i
lift up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw everi high hill,
and all the thick trees, and they offer there their sacrifices, and
ther they present the provoc of their offering: there also
they made their sweet savour, and pour out there their drink
offerings.

20:29 then I said unto them, what is the high place whereunto ye go?
and the name whereof is call bamah unto thi day.

20:30 wherefor say unto the hous of israel, thu saith the lord god;
ar ye pollut after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye
whoredom after their abominations?  20:31 for when ye offer your
gifts, when ye make your son to pass through the fire, ye pollute
yourselv with all your idols, even unto thi day: and shall I be
enquir of by you, O hous of israel? As I live, saith the lord god,
i will not be enquir of by you.

20:32 and that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that
y say, We will be as the heathen, as the famili of the countries,
to serv wood and stone.

20:33 As I live, saith the lord god, sure with a mighti hand, and
with a stretch out arm, and with furi pour out, will I rule over
you: 20:34 and I will bring you out from the people, and will gather
y out of the countri wherein ye are scattered, with a mighti hand,
and with a stretch out arm, and with furi pour out.

20:35 and I will bring you into the wilder of the people, and
ther will I plead with you face to face.

20:36 like as I plead with your father in the wilder of the
land of egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the lord god.

20:37 and I will caus you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you
into the bond of the covenant: 20:38 and I will purg out from among
y the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them
forth out of the countri where they sojourn, and they shall not enter
into the land of israel: and ye shall know that I am the lord.

20:39 As for you, O hous of israel, thu saith the lord god; Go ye,
serv ye everi one hi idols, and hereaft also, if ye will not
hearken unto me: but pollut ye my holi name no more with your gifts,
and with your idols.

20:40 for in mine holi mountain, in the mountain of the height of
israel, saith the lord god, there shall all the hous of israel, all
of them in the land, serv me: there will I accept them, and there
wil I requir your offerings, and the firstfruit of your oblations,
with all your holi things.

20:41 I will accept you with your sweet savour, when I bring you out
from the people, and gather you out of the countri wherein ye have
been scattered; and I will be sanctifi in you befor the heathen.

20:42 and ye shall know that I am the lord, when I shall bring you
into the land of israel, into the countri for the which I lift up
min hand to give it to your fathers.

20:43 and there shall ye rememb your ways, and all your doings,
wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall loth yourselv in your
own sight for all your evil that ye have committed.

20:44 and ye shall know that I am the lord when I have wrought with
you for my name' sake, not accord to your wick ways, nor
accord to your corrupt doings, O ye hous of israel, saith the lord
god.

20:45 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 20:46 son of
man, set thi face toward the south, and drop thi word toward the
south, and prophesi against the forest of the south field; 20:47 and
say to the forest of the south, hear the word of the lord; thu saith
th lord god; behold, I will kindl a fire in thee, and it shall
devour everi green tree in thee, and everi dri tree: the flame flame
shal not be quenched, and all face from the south to the north shall
b burn therein.

20:48 and all flesh shall see that I the lord have kindl it: it
shal not be quenched.

20:49 then said I, Ah lord god! they say of me, doth he not speak
parables?  21:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 21:2
son of man, set thi face toward jerusalem, and drop thi word toward
th holi places, and prophesi against the land of israel, 21:3 and say
to the land of israel, thu saith the lord; behold, I am against thee,
and will draw forth my sword out of hi sheath, and will cut off from
the the righteou and the wicked.

21:4 see then that I will cut off from thee the righteou and the
wicked, therefor shall my sword go forth out of hi sheath against
al flesh from the south to the north: 21:5 that all flesh may know
that I the lord have drawn forth my sword out of hi sheath: it shall
not return ani more.

21:6 sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the break of thi loins;
and with bitter sigh befor their eyes.

21:7 and it shall be, when they say unto thee, wherefor sighest thou?
that thou shalt answer, for the tidings; becaus it cometh: and every
heart shall melt, and all hand shall be feeble, and everi spirit
shal faint, and all knee shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh,
and shall be brought to pass, saith the lord god.

21:8 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 21:9 son of man,
prophesy, and say, thu saith the lord; say, A sword, a sword is
sharpened, and also furbished: 21:10 It is sharpen to make a sore
slaughter; it is furbish that it may glitter: should we then make
mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as everi tree.

21:11 and he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled:
thi sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand
of the slayer.

21:12 cri and howl, son of man: for it shall be upon my people, it
shal be upon all the princ of israel: terror by reason of the
sword shall be upon my people: smite therefor upon thi thigh.

21:13 becaus it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the
rod?  it shall be no more, saith the lord god.

21:14 thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands
together. and let the sword be doubl the third time, the sword of
th slain: it is the sword of the great men that are slain, which
entereth into their privi chambers.

21:15 I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that
their heart may faint, and their ruin be multiplied: ah! it is made
bright, it is wrap up for the slaughter.

21:16 Go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or on the
left, whithersoev thi face is set.

21:17 I will also smite mine hand together, and I will caus my fury
to rest: I the lord have said it.

21:18 the word of the lord came unto me again, saying, 21:19 also,
th son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king of
babylon may come: both twain shall come forth out of one land: and
choos thou a place, choos it at the head of the way to the city.

21:20 appoint a way, that the sword may come to rabbath of the
ammonites, and to judah in jerusalem the defenced.

21:21 for the king of babylon stood at the part of the way, at the
head of the two ways, to use divination: he made hi arrow bright, he
consult with images, he look in the liver.

21:22 At hi right hand wa the divin for jerusalem, to appoint
captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice
with shouting, to appoint batter ram against the gates, to cast a
mount, and to build a fort.

21:23 and it shall be unto them as a fals divin in their sight,
to them that have sworn oaths: but he will call to remembr the
iniquity, that they may be taken.

21:24 therefor thu saith the lord god; becaus ye have made your
iniqu to be remembered, in that your transgress are discovered,
so that in all your do your sin do appear; because, I say, that
y are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.

21:25 and thou, profan wick princ of israel, whose day is come,
when iniqu shall have an end, 21:26 thu saith the lord god; remove
th diadem, and take off the crown: thi shall not be the same: exalt
him that is low, and abas him that is high.

21:27 I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no
more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.

21:28 and thou, son of man, prophesi and say, thu saith the lord god
concern the ammonites, and concern their reproach; even say
thou, the sword, the sword is drawn: for the slaughter it is
furbished, to consum becaus of the glittering: 21:29 while they see
van unto thee, while they divin a lie unto thee, to bring thee
upon the neck of them that are slain, of the wicked, whose day is
come, when their iniqu shall have an end.

21:30 shall I caus it to return into hi sheath? I will judg thee in
th place where thou wast created, in the land of thi nativity.

21:31 and I will pour out mine indign upon thee, I will blow
against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliv thee into the hand
of brutish men, and skil to destroy.

21:32 thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thi blood shall be in the
midst of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered: for I the lord
hav spoken it.

22:1 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 22:2 now,
thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judg the bloodi city?
yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations.

22:3 then say thou, thu saith the lord god, the citi sheddeth blood
in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idol against
herself to defil herself.

22:4 thou art becom guilti in thi blood that thou hast shed; and hast
defil thyself in thine idol which thou hast made; and thou hast
caus thi day to draw near, and art come even unto thi years:
therefor have I made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking
to all countries.

22:5 those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock
thee, which art infam and much vexed.

22:6 behold, the princ of israel, everi one were in thee to their
pow to shed blood.

22:7 In thee have they set light by father and mother: in the midst of
the have they dealt by oppress with the stranger: in thee have
they vex the fatherless and the widow.

22:8 thou hast despis mine holi things, and hast profan my
sabbaths.

22:9 In thee are men that carri tale to shed blood: and in thee they
eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thee they commit lewdness.

22:10 In thee have they discov their fathers' nakedness: in thee
hav they humbl her that wa set apart for pollution.

22:11 and one hath commit abomin with hi neighbour' wife;
and anoth hath lewdli defil hi daughter in law; and anoth in
the hath humbl hi sister, hi father' daughter.

22:12 In thee have they taken gift to shed blood; thou hast taken
usuri and increase, and thou hast greedili gain of thi neighbour by
extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the lord god.

22:13 behold, therefor I have smitten mine hand at thi dishonest gain
which thou hast made, and at thi blood which hath been in the midst of
thee.

22:14 can thine heart endure, or can thine hand be strong, in the
day that I shall deal with thee? I the lord have spoken it, and will
do it.

22:15 and I will scatter thee among the heathen, and dispers thee in
th countries, and will consum thi filthi out of thee.

22:16 and thou shalt take thine inherit in thyself in the sight of
th heathen, and thou shalt know that I am the lord.

22:17 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 22:18 son of man,
th hous of israel is to me becom dross: all they are brass, and
tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even
th dross of silver.

22:19 therefor thu saith the lord god; becaus ye are all become
dross, behold, therefor I will gather you into the midst of
jerusalem.

22:20 As they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin,
into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it;
so will I gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave
y there, and melt you.

22:21 yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my
wrath, and ye shall be melt in the midst therof.

22:22 As silver is melt in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be
melt in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the lord have
pour out my furi upon you.

22:23 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 22:24 son of man,
say unto her, thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rain upon
in the day of indignation.

22:25 there is a conspiraci of her prophet in the midst thereof, like
a roar lion raven the prey; they have devour souls; they have
taken the treasur and preciou things; they have made her mani widows
in the midst thereof.

22:26 her priest have violat my law, and have profan mine holy
things: they have put no differ between the holi and profane,
neith have they shew differ between the unclean and the clean,
and have hid their eye from my sabbaths, and I am profan among
them.

22:27 her princ in the midst thereof are like wolv raven the
prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain.

22:28 and her prophet have daub them with untemp morter, seeing
vanity, and divin lie unto them, saying, thu saith the lord god,
when the lord hath not spoken.

22:29 the peopl of the land have use oppression, and exercised
robbery, and have vex the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed
th stranger wrongfully.

22:30 and I sought for a man among them, that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap befor me for the land, that I should not
destroy it: but I found none.

22:31 therefor have I pour out mine indign upon them; I have
consum them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have i
recompens upon their heads, saith the lord god.

23:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 23:2 son of man,
ther were two women, the daughter of one mother: 23:3 and they
commit whoredom in egypt; they commit whoredom in their youth:
ther were their breast pressed, and there they bruis the teat of
their virginity.

23:4 and the name of them were aholah the elder, and aholibah her
sister: and they were mine, and they bare son and daughters. thus
wer their names; samaria is aholah, and jerusalem aholibah.

23:5 and aholah play the harlot when she wa mine; and she dote on
her lovers, on the assyrian her neighbours, 23:6 which were clothed
with blue, captain and rulers, all of them desir young men,
horsemen ride upon horses.

23:7 thu she commit her whoredom with them, with all them that
wer the chosen men of assyria, and with all on whom she doted: with
al their idol she defil herself.

23:8 neither left she her whoredom brought from egypt: for in her
youth they lay with her, and they bruis the breast of her
virginity, and pour their whoredom upon her.

23:9 wherefor I have deliv her into the hand of her lovers, into
th hand of the assyrians, upon whom she doted.

23:10 these discov her nakedness: they took her son and her
daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she becam famou among
women; for they had execut judgment upon her.

23:11 and when her sister aholibah saw this, she wa more corrupt in
her inordin love than she, and in her whoredom more than her
sist in her whoredoms.

23:12 she dote upon the assyrian her neighbours, captain and rulers
cloth most gorgeously, horsemen ride upon horses, all of them
desir young men.

23:13 then I saw that she wa defiled, that they took both one way,
23:14 and that she increas her whoredoms: for when she saw men
pourtray upon the wall, the imag of the chaldean pourtray with
vermilion, 23:15 gird with girdl upon their loins, exceed in
di attir upon their heads, all of them princ to look to, after
th manner of the babylonian of chaldea, the land of their nativity:
23:16 and as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she dote upon them,
and sent messeng unto them into chaldea.

23:17 and the babylonian came to her into the bed of love, and they
defil her with their whoredom, and she wa pollut with them, and
her mind wa alien from them.

23:18 So she discov her whoredoms, and discov her nakedness:
then my mind wa alien from her, like as my mind wa alienated
from her sister.

23:19 yet she multipli her whoredoms, in call to remembr the
day of her youth, wherein she had play the harlot in the land of
egypt.

23:20 for she dote upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh
of asses, and whose issu is like the issu of horses.

23:21 thu thou calledst to remembr the lewd of thi youth, in
bruis thi teat by the egyptian for the pap of thi youth.

23:22 therefore, O aholibah, thu saith the lord god; behold, I will
rais up thi lover against thee, from whom thi mind is alienated, and
i will bring them against thee on everi side; 23:23 the babylonians,
and all the chaldeans, pekod, and shoa, and koa, and all the assyrians
with them: all of them desir young men, captain and rulers, great
lord and renowned, all of them ride upon horses.

23:24 and they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and
wheels, and with an assembl of people, which shall set against thee
buckl and shield and helmet round about: and I will set judgment
befor them, and they shall judg thee accord to their judgments.

23:25 and I will set my jealousi against thee, and they shall deal
furi with thee: they shall take away thi nose and thine ears; and
thi remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall take thi son and thy
daughters; and thi residu shall be devour by the fire.

23:26 they shall also strip thee out of thi clothes, and take away thy
fair jewels.

23:27 thu will I make thi lewd to ceas from thee, and thy
whoredom brought from the land of egypt: so that thou shalt not lift
up thine eye unto them, nor rememb egypt ani more.

23:28 for thu saith the lord god; behold, I will deliv thee into
th hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy
mind is alienated: 23:29 and they shall deal with thee hatefully, and
shal take away all thi labour, and shall leav thee nake and bare:
and the naked of thi whoredom shall be discovered, both thy
lewd and thi whoredoms.

23:30 I will do these thing unto thee, becaus thou hast gone a
whor after the heathen, and becaus thou art pollut with their
idols.

23:31 thou hast walk in the way of thi sister; therefor will I give
h cup into thine hand.

23:32 thu saith the lord god; thou shalt drink of thi sister' cup
deep and large: thou shalt be laugh to scorn and had in derision; it
containeth much.

23:33 thou shalt be fill with drunken and sorrow, with the cup
of astonish and desolation, with the cup of thi sister samaria.

23:34 thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break
th sherd thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken
it, saith the lord god.

23:35 therefor thu saith the lord god; becaus thou hast forgotten
me, and cast me behind thi back, therefor bear thou also thi lewdness
and thi whoredoms.

23:36 the lord said moreov unto me; son of man, wilt thou judge
aholah and aholibah? yea, declar unto them their abominations; 23:37
that they have commit adultery, and blood is in their hands, and
with their idol have they commit adultery, and have also caused
their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for them through the fire,
to devour them.

23:38 moreov thi they have done unto me: they have defil my
sanctuari in the same day, and have profan my sabbaths.

23:39 for when they had slain their children to their idols, then they
cam the same day into my sanctuari to profan it; and, lo, thu have
they done in the midst of mine house.

23:40 and furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far,
unto whom a messeng wa sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou
didst wash thyself, paintedst thi eyes, and deckedst thyself with
ornaments, 23:41 and satest upon a state bed, and a tabl prepared
befor it, whereupon thou hast set mine incens and mine oil.

23:42 and a voic of a multitud be at eas wa with her: and with
th men of the common sort were brought sabean from the wilderness,
which put bracelet upon their hands, and beauti crown upon their
heads.

23:43 then said I unto her that wa old in adulteries, will they now
commit whoredom with her, and she with them?  23:44 yet they went in
unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went
they in unto aholah and unto aholibah, the lewd women.

23:45 and the righteou men, they shall judg them after the manner of
adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood; because
they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.

23:46 for thu saith the lord god; I will bring up a compani upon
them, and will give them to be remov and spoiled.

23:47 and the compani shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them
with their swords; they shall slay their son and their daughters, and
burn up their hous with fire.

23:48 thu will I caus lewd to ceas out of the land, that all
women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

23:49 and they shall recompens your lewd upon you, and ye shall
bear the sin of your idols: and ye shall know that I am the lord god.

24:1 again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of
th month, the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:2 son of man,
writ thee the name of the day, even of thi same day: the king of
babylon set himself against jerusalem thi same day.

24:3 and utter a parabl unto the rebelli house, and say unto them,
thu saith the lord god; set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water
into it: 24:4 gather the piec thereof into it, even everi good
piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choic bones.

24:5 take the choic of the flock, and burn also the bone under it,
and make it boil well, and let them seeth the bone of it therein.

24:6 wherefor thu saith the lord god; woe to the bloodi city, to the
pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring
it out piec by piece; let no lot fall upon it.

24:7 for her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of
a rock; she pour it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; 24:8
that it might caus furi to come up to take vengeance; I have set her
blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.

24:9 therefor thu saith the lord god; woe to the bloodi city! I will
even make the pile for fire great.

24:10 heap on wood, kindl the fire, consum the flesh, and spice it
well, and let the bone be burned.

24:11 then set it empti upon the coal thereof, that the brass of it
may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthi of it may be molten
in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.

24:12 she hath weari herself with lies, and her great scum went not
forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.

24:13 In thi filthi is lewdness: becaus I have purg thee, and
thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purg from thi filthi any
more, till I have caus my furi to rest upon thee.

24:14 I the lord have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do
it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent;
accord to thi ways, and accord to thi doings, shall they judge
thee, saith the lord god.

24:15 also the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:16 son of
man, behold, I take away from thee the desir of thine eye with a
stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thi tears
run down.

24:17 forbear to cry, make no mourn for the dead, bind the tire of
thin head upon thee, and put on thi shoe upon thi feet, and cover
not thi lips, and eat not the bread of men.

24:18 So I spake unto the peopl in the morning: and at even my wife
died; and I did in the morn as I wa commanded.

24:19 and the peopl said unto me, wilt thou not tell us what these
th are to us, that thou doest so?  24:20 then I answer them, the
word of the lord came unto me, saying, 24:21 speak unto the hous of
israel, thu saith the lord god; behold, I will profan my sanctuary,
th excel of your strength, the desir of your eyes, and that
which your soul pitieth; and your son and your daughter whom ye have
left shall fall by the sword.

24:22 and ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover your lips,
nor eat the bread of men.

24:23 and your tire shall be upon your heads, and your shoe upon
your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for
your iniquities, and mourn one toward another.

24:24 thu ezekiel is unto you a sign: accord to all that he hath
don shall ye do: and when thi cometh, ye shall know that I am the
lord god.

24:25 also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take
from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desir of their
eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their son and their
daughters, 24:26 that he that escapeth in that day shall come unto
thee, to caus thee to hear it with thine ears?  24:27 In that day
shal thi mouth be open to him which is escaped, and thou shalt
speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and
they shall know that I am the lord.

25:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 25:2 son of man,
set thi face against the ammonites, and prophesi against them; 25:3
and say unto the ammonites, hear the word of the lord god; thu saith
th lord god; becaus thou saidst, aha, against my sanctuary, when it
wa profaned; and against the land of israel, when it wa desolate;
and against the hous of judah, when they went into captivity; 25:4
behold, therefor I will deliv thee to the men of the east for a
possession, and they shall set their palac in thee, and make their
dwel in thee: they shall eat thi fruit, and they shall drink thy
milk.

25:5 and I will make rabbah a stabl for camels, and the ammonit a
couch place for flocks: and ye shall know that I am the lord.

25:6 for thu saith the lord god; becaus thou hast clap thine
hands, and stamp with the feet, and rejoic in heart with all thy
despit against the land of israel; 25:7 behold, therefor I will
stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliv thee for a spoil to
th heathen; and I will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause
the to perish out of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou
shalt know that I am the lord.

25:8 thu saith the lord god; becaus that moab and seir do say,
behold, the hous of judah is like unto all the heathen; 25:9
therefore, behold, I will open the side of moab from the cities, from
hi citi which are on hi frontiers, the glori of the country,
bethjeshimoth, baalmeon, and kiriathaim, 25:10 unto the men of the
east with the ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the
ammonit may not be rememb among the nations.

25:11 and I will execut judgment upon moab; and they shall know that
i am the lord.

25:12 thu saith the lord god; becaus that edom hath dealt against
th hous of judah by take vengeance, and hath greatli offended, and
reveng himself upon them; 25:13 therefor thu saith the lord god; i
wil also stretch out mine hand upon edom, and will cut off man and
beast from it; and I will make it desol from teman; and they of
dedan shall fall by the sword.

25:14 and I will lay my vengeanc upon edom by the hand of my people
israel: and they shall do in edom accord to mine anger and
accord to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the lord
god.

25:15 thu saith the lord god; becaus the philistin have dealt by
revenge, and have taken vengeanc with a despit heart, to destroy
it for the old hatred; 25:16 therefor thu saith the lord god;
behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon the philistines, and I will
cut off the cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

25:17 and I will execut great vengeanc upon them with furious
rebukes; and they shall know that I am the lord, when I shall lay my
veng upon them.

26:1 and it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the
month, that the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 26:2 son of
man, becaus that tyru hath said against jerusalem, aha, she is
broken that wa the gate of the people: she is turn unto me: i
shal be replenished, now she is laid waste: 26:3 therefor thu saith
th lord god; behold, I am against thee, O tyrus, and will caus many
n to come up against thee, as the sea causeth hi wave to come
up.

26:4 and they shall destroy the wall of tyrus, and break down her
towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the
top of a rock.

26:5 It shall be a place for the spread of net in the midst of the
sea: for I have spoken it, saith the lord god: and it shall becom a
spoil to the nations.

26:6 and her daughter which are in the field shall be slain by the
sword; and they shall know that I am the lord.

26:7 for thu saith the lord god; behold, I will bring upon tyrus
nebuchadrezzar king of babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much
people.

26:8 He shall slay with the sword thi daughter in the field: and he
shal make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and
lift up the buckler against thee.

26:9 and he shall set engin of war against thi walls, and with his
ax he shall break down thi towers.

26:10 By reason of the abund of hi hors their dust shall cover
thee: thi wall shall shake at the nois of the horsemen, and of the
wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thi gates, as
men enter into a citi wherein is made a breach.

26:11 with the hoof of hi hors shall he tread down all thy
streets: he shall slay thi peopl by the sword, and thi strong
garrison shall go down to the ground.

26:12 and they shall make a spoil of thi riches, and make a prey of
thi merchandise: and they shall break down thi walls, and destroy thy
pleas houses: and they shall lay thi stone and thi timber and thy
dust in the midst of the water.

26:13 and I will caus the nois of thi song to cease; and the sound
of thi harp shall be no more heard.

26:14 and I will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a
plac to spread net upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the lord
hav spoken it, saith the lord god.

26:15 thu saith the lord god to tyrus; shall not the isl shake at
th sound of thi fall, when the wound cry, when the slaughter is
mad in the midst of thee?  26:16 then all the princ of the sea
shal come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put
off their broider garments: they shall cloth themselv with
trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall trembl at every
moment, and be astonish at thee.

26:17 and they shall take up a lament for thee, and say to thee,
how art thou destroyed, that wast inhabit of seafar men, the
renown city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants,
which caus their terror to be on all that haunt it!  26:18 now shall
th isl trembl in the day of thi fall; yea, the isl that are in
th sea shall be troubl at thi departure.

26:19 for thu saith the lord god; when I shall make thee a desolate
city, like the citi that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up
th deep upon thee, and great water shall cover thee; 26:20 when i
shal bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the
peopl of old time, and shall set thee in the low part of the earth,
in place desol of old, with them that go down to the pit, that
thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glori in the land of the
living; 26:21 I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more:
though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith
th lord god.

27:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 27:2 now, thou
son of man, take up a lament for tyrus; 27:3 and say unto tyrus,
o thou that art situat at the entri of the sea, which art a merchant
of the peopl for mani isles, thu saith the lord god; O tyrus, thou
hast said, I am of perfect beauty.

27:4 thi border are in the midst of the seas, thi builder have
perfect thi beauty.

27:5 they have made all thi ship board of fir tree of senir: they
hav taken cedar from lebanon to make mast for thee.

27:6 Of the oak of bashan have they made thine oars; the compani of
th ashurit have made thi bench of ivory, brought out of the isles
of chittim.

27:7 fine linen with broider work from egypt wa that which thou
spreadest forth to be thi sail; blue and purpl from the isl of
elishah wa that which cover thee.

27:8 the inhabit of zidon and arvad were thi mariners: thi wise
men, O tyrus, that were in thee, were thi pilots.

27:9 the ancient of gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy
calkers: all the ship of the sea with their marin were in thee to
occupi thi merchandise.

27:10 they of persia and of lud and of phut were in thine army, thy
men of war: they hang the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth
thi comeliness.

27:11 the men of arvad with thine armi were upon thi wall round
about, and the gammadim were in thi towers: they hang their shields
upon thi wall round about; they have made thi beauti perfect.

27:12 tarshish wa thi merchant by reason of the multitud of all kind
of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they trade in thi fairs.

27:13 javan, tubal, and meshech, they were thi merchants: they traded
th person of men and vessel of brass in thi market.

27:14 they of the hous of togarmah trade in thi fair with horses
and horsemen and mules.

27:15 the men of dedan were thi merchants; mani isl were the
merchandis of thine hand: they brought thee for a present horn of
ivori and ebony.

27:16 syria wa thi merchant by reason of the multitud of the wares
of thi making: they occupi in thi fair with emeralds, purple, and
broid work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.

27:17 judah, and the land of israel, they were thi merchants: they
trad in thi market wheat of minnith, and pannag, and honey, and oil,
and balm.

27:18 damascu wa thi merchant in the multitud of the ware of thy
making, for the multitud of all riches; in the wine of helbon, and
whit wool.

27:19 dan also and javan go to and fro occupi in thi fairs:
bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thi market.

27:20 dedan wa thi merchant in preciou cloth for chariots.

27:21 arabia, and all the princ of kedar, they occupi with thee in
lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were they thi merchants.

27:22 the merchant of sheba and raamah, they were thi merchants: they
occupi in thi fair with chief of all spices, and with all precious
stones, and gold.

27:23 haran, and canneh, and eden, the merchant of sheba, asshur, and
chilmad, were thi merchants.

27:24 these were thi merchant in all sort of things, in blue
clothes, and broider work, and in chest of rich apparel, bound with
cords, and made of cedar, among thi merchandise.

27:25 the ship of tarshish did sing of thee in thi market: and thou
wast replenished, and made veri gloriou in the midst of the seas.

27:26 thi rower have brought thee into great waters: the east wind
hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.

27:27 thi riches, and thi fairs, thi merchandise, thi mariners, and
thi pilots, thi calkers, and the occupi of thi merchandise, and all
thi men of war, that are in thee, and in all thi compani which is in
th midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the sea in the day of
thi ruin.

27:28 the suburb shall shake at the sound of the cri of thi pilots.

27:29 and all that handl the oar, the mariners, and all the pilot of
th sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the
land; 27:30 and shall caus their voic to be heard against thee, and
shal cri bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they
shal wallow themselv in the ashes: 27:31 and they shall make
themselv utterli bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and
they shall weep for thee with bitter of heart and bitter wailing.

27:32 and in their wail they shall take up a lament for thee,
and lament over thee, saying, what citi is like tyrus, like the
destroy in the midst of the sea?  27:33 when thi ware went forth
out of the seas, thou filledst mani people; thou didst enrich the
k of the earth with the multitud of thi rich and of thy
merchandise.

27:34 In the time when thou shalt be broken by the sea in the depths
of the water thi merchandis and all thi compani in the midst of thee
shal fall.

27:35 all the inhabit of the isl shall be astonish at thee,
and their king shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubl in their
countenance.

27:36 the merchant among the peopl shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be
a terror, and never shalt be ani more.

28:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 28:2 son of man,
say unto the princ of tyrus, thu saith the lord god; becaus thine
heart is lift up, and thou hast said, I am a god, I sit in the seat
of god, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not god,
though thou set thine heart as the heart of god: 28:3 behold, thou art
wis than daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee:
28:4 with thi wisdom and with thine understand thou hast gotten
the riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thi treasures: 28:5
bi thi great wisdom and by thi traffick hast thou increas thy
riches, and thine heart is lift up becaus of thi riches: 28:6
therefor thu saith the lord god; becaus thou hast set thine heart
a the heart of god; 28:7 behold, therefor I will bring strangers
upon thee, the terribl of the nations: and they shall draw their
sword against the beauti of thi wisdom, and they shall defil thy
brightness.

28:8 they shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the
death of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.

28:9 wilt thou yet say befor him that slayeth thee, I am god? but
thou shalt be a man, and no god, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.

28:10 thou shalt die the death of the uncircumcis by the hand of
strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the lord god.

28:11 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 28:12 son of
man, take up a lament upon the king of tyrus, and say unto him,
thu saith the lord god; thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and
perfect in beauty.

28:13 thou hast been in eden the garden of god; everi preciou stone
wa thi covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the
onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle,
and gold: the workmanship of thi tabret and of thi pipe wa prepared
in thee in the day that thou wast created.

28:14 thou art the anoint cherub that covereth; and I have set thee
so: thou wast upon the holi mountain of god; thou hast walk up and
down in the midst of the stone of fire.

28:15 thou wast perfect in thi way from the day that thou wast
created, till iniqu wa found in thee.

28:16 By the multitud of thi merchandis they have fill the midst
of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefor I will cast
the as profan out of the mountain of god: and I will destroy thee, o
cov cherub, from the midst of the stone of fire.

28:17 thine heart wa lift up becaus of thi beauty, thou hast
corrupt thi wisdom by reason of thi brightness: I will cast thee to
th ground, I will lay thee befor kings, that they may behold thee.

28:18 thou hast defil thi sanctuari by the multitud of thine
iniquities, by the iniqu of thi traffick; therefor will I bring
forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will
br thee to ash upon the earth in the sight of all them that
behold thee.

28:19 all they that know thee among the peopl shall be astonish at
thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be ani more.

28:20 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 28:21 son of
man, set thi face against zidon, and prophesi against it, 28:22 and
say, thu saith the lord god; behold, I am against thee, O zidon; and
i will be glorifi in the midst of thee: and they shall know that i
am the lord, when I shall have execut judgment in her, and shall be
sanctifi in her.

28:23 for I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her streets;
and the wound shall be judg in the midst of her by the sword upon
h on everi side; and they shall know that I am the lord.

28:24 and there shall be no more a prick brier unto the hous of
israel, nor ani griev thorn of all that are round about them, that
despis them; and they shall know that I am the lord god.

28:25 thu saith the lord god; when I shall have gather the hous of
israel from the peopl among whom they are scattered, and shall be
sanctifi in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell
in their land that I have given to my servant jacob.

28:26 and they shall dwell safe therein, and shall build houses, and
plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have
execut judgment upon all those that despis them round about them;
and they shall know that I am the lord their god.

29:1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the
month, the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 29:2 son of man, set
thi face against pharaoh king of egypt, and prophesi against him, and
against all egypt: 29:3 speak, and say, thu saith the lord god;
behold, I am against thee, pharaoh king of egypt, the great dragon
that lieth in the midst of hi rivers, which hath said, My river is
min own, and I have made it for myself.

29:4 but I will put hook in thi jaws, and I will caus the fish of
thi river to stick unto thi scales, and I will bring thee up out of
th midst of thi rivers, and all the fish of thi river shall stick
unto thi scales.

29:5 and I will leav thee thrown into the wilderness, thee and all
th fish of thi rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou
shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thee for
meat to the beast of the field and to the fowl of the heaven.

29:6 and all the inhabit of egypt shall know that I am the lord,
becaus they have been a staff of reed to the hous of israel.

29:7 when they took hold of thee by thi hand, thou didst break, and
rend all their shoulder: and when they lean upon thee, thou brakest,
and madest all their loin to be at a stand.

29:8 therefor thu saith the lord god; behold, I will bring a sword
upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee.

29:9 and the land of egypt shall be desol and waste; and they shall
know that I am the lord: becaus he hath said, the river is mine, and
i have made it.

29:10 behold, therefor I am against thee, and against thi rivers, and
i will make the land of egypt utterli wast and desolate, from the
tow of syen even unto the border of ethiopia.

29:11 No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall
pass through it, neither shall it be inhabit forti years.

29:12 and I will make the land of egypt desol in the midst of the
countri that are desolate, and her citi among the citi that are
laid wast shall be desol forti years: and I will scatter the
egyptian among the nations, and will dispers them through the
countries.

29:13 yet thu saith the lord god; At the end of forti year will i
gath the egyptian from the peopl whither they were scattered:
29:14 and I will bring again the captiv of egypt, and will cause
them to return into the land of pathros, into the land of their
habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

29:15 It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt
itself ani more abov the nations: for I will diminish them, that they
shal no more rule over the nations.

29:16 and it shall be no more the confid of the hous of israel,
which bringeth their iniqu to remembrance, when they shall look
aft them: but they shall know that I am the lord god.

29:17 and it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the
first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the lord came
unto me, saying, 29:18 son of man, nebuchadrezzar king of babylon
caus hi armi to serv a great servic against tyrus: everi head was
mad bald, and everi shoulder wa peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his
army, for tyrus, for the servic that he had serv against it: 29:19
therefor thu saith the lord god; behold, I will give the land of
egypt unto nebuchadrezzar king of babylon; and he shall take her
multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the
wag for hi army.

29:20 I have given him the land of egypt for hi labour wherewith he
serv against it, becaus they wrought for me, saith the lord god.

29:21 In that day will I caus the horn of the hous of israel to bud
forth, and I will give thee the open of the mouth in the midst of
them; and they shall know that I am the lord.

30:1 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 30:2 son of man,
prophesi and say, thu saith the lord god; howl ye, woe worth the day!
30:3 for the day is near, even the day of the lord is near, a cloudy
day; it shall be the time of the heathen.

30:4 and the sword shall come upon egypt, and great pain shall be in
ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in egypt, and they shall take away
h multitude, and her foundat shall be broken down.

30:5 ethiopia, and libya, and lydia, and all the mingl people, and
chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them
bi the sword.

30:6 thu saith the lord; they also that uphold egypt shall fall; and
th pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of syen shall
they fall in it by the sword, saith the lord god.

30:7 and they shall be desol in the midst of the countri that are
desolate, and her citi shall be in the midst of the citi that are
wasted.

30:8 and they shall know that I am the lord, when I have set a fire in
egypt, and when all her helper shall be destroyed.

30:9 In that day shall messeng go forth from me in ship to make
th careless ethiopian afraid, and great pain shall come upon them,
a in the day of egypt: for, lo, it cometh.

30:10 thu saith the lord god; I will also make the multitud of egypt
to ceas by the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon.

30:11 He and hi peopl with him, the terribl of the nations, shall
b brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords
against egypt, and fill the land with the slain.

30:12 and I will make the river dry, and sell the land into the hand
of the wicked: and I will make the land waste, and all that is
therein, by the hand of strangers: I the lord have spoken it.

30:13 thu saith the lord god; I will also destroy the idols, and i
wil caus their imag to ceas out of noph; and there shall be no
mor a princ of the land of egypt: and I will put a fear in the land
of egypt.

30:14 and I will make pathro desolate, and will set fire in zoan, and
wil execut judgment in no.

30:15 and I will pour my furi upon sin, the strength of egypt; and i
wil cut off the multitud of no.

30:16 and I will set fire in egypt: sin shall have great pain, and no
shal be rent asunder, and noph shall have distress daily.

30:17 the young men of aven and of pibeseth shall fall by the sword:
and these citi shall go into captivity.

30:18 At tehaphneh also the day shall be darkened, when I shall
break there the yoke of egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall
ceas in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters
shal go into captivity.

30:19 thu will I execut judgment in egypt: and they shall know that
i am the lord.

30:20 and it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in
th seventh day of the month, that the word of the lord came unto me,
saying, 30:21 son of man, I have broken the arm of pharaoh king of
egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller
to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.

30:22 therefor thu saith the lord god; behold, I am against pharaoh
k of egypt, and will break hi arms, the strong, and that which was
broken; and I will caus the sword to fall out of hi hand.

30:23 and I will scatter the egyptian among the nations, and will
dispers them through the countries.

30:24 and I will strengthen the arm of the king of babylon, and put
mi sword in hi hand: but I will break pharaoh' arms, and he shall
groan befor him with the groan of a deadli wound man.

30:25 but I will strengthen the arm of the king of babylon, and the
arm of pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am the
lord, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of babylon,
and he shall stretch it out upon the land of egypt.

30:26 and I will scatter the egyptian among the nations, and disperse
them among the countries; and they shall know that I am the lord.

31:1 and it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in
th first day of the month, that the word of the lord came unto me,
saying, 31:2 son of man, speak unto pharaoh king of egypt, and to his
multitude; whom art thou like in thi greatness?  31:3 behold, the
assyrian wa a cedar in lebanon with fair branches, and with a
shadow shroud, and of an high stature; and hi top wa among the
thick boughs.

31:4 the water made him great, the deep set him up on high with her
riv run round about hi plants, and sent her littl river unto
al the tree of the field.

31:5 therefor hi height wa exalt abov all the tree of the
field, and hi bough were multiplied, and hi branch becam long
becaus of the multitud of waters, when he shot forth.

31:6 all the fowl of heaven made their nest in hi boughs, and under
hi branch did all the beast of the field bring forth their young,
and under hi shadow dwelt all great nations.

31:7 thu wa he fair in hi greatness, in the length of hi branches:
for hi root wa by great waters.

31:8 the cedar in the garden of god could not hide him: the fir trees
wer not like hi boughs, and the chestnut tree were not like his
branches; nor ani tree in the garden of god wa like unto him in his
beauty.

31:9 I have made him fair by the multitud of hi branches: so that
al the tree of eden, that were in the garden of god, envi him.

31:10 therefor thu saith the lord god; becaus thou hast lift up
thyself in height, and he hath shot up hi top among the thick boughs,
and hi heart is lift up in hi height; 31:11 I have therefore
deliv him into the hand of the mighti one of the heathen; he shall
sur deal with him: I have driven him out for hi wickedness.

31:12 and strangers, the terribl of the nations, have cut him off,
and have left him: upon the mountain and in all the valley his
branch are fallen, and hi bough are broken by all the river of
th land; and all the peopl of the earth are gone down from his
shadow, and have left him.

31:13 upon hi ruin shall all the fowl of the heaven remain, and all
th beast of the field shall be upon hi branches: 31:14 To the end
that none of all the tree by the water exalt themselv for their
height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither
their tree stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they
ar all deliv unto death, to the nether part of the earth, in the
midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.

31:15 thu saith the lord god; In the day when he went down to the
grav I caus a mourning: I cover the deep for him, and i
restrain the flood thereof, and the great water were stayed: and i
caus lebanon to mourn for him, and all the tree of the field
faint for him.

31:16 I made the nation to shake at the sound of hi fall, when i
cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the
tre of eden, the choic and best of lebanon, all that drink water,
shal be comfort in the nether part of the earth.

31:17 they also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain
with the sword; and they that were hi arm, that dwelt under his
shadow in the midst of the heathen.

31:18 To whom art thou thu like in glori and in great among the
tre of eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the tree of eden
unto the nether part of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the
uncircumcis with them that be slain by the sword. thi is pharaoh
and all hi multitude, saith the lord god.

32:1 and it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in
th first day of the month, that the word of the lord came unto me,
saying, 32:2 son of man, take up a lament for pharaoh king of
egypt, and say unto him, thou art like a young lion of the nations,
and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy
rivers, and troubledst the water with thi feet, and fouledst their
rivers.

32:3 thu saith the lord god; I will therefor spread out my net over
the with a compani of mani people; and they shall bring thee up in my
net.

32:4 then will I leav thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon
th open field, and will caus all the fowl of the heaven to remain
upon thee, and I will fill the beast of the whole earth with thee.

32:5 and I will lay thi flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys
with thi height.

32:6 I will also water with thi blood the land wherein thou swimmest,
even to the mountains; and the river shall be full of thee.

32:7 and when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make
th star thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the
moon shall not give her light.

32:8 all the bright light of heaven will I make dark over thee, and
set dark upon thi land, saith the lord god.

32:9 I will also vex the heart of mani people, when I shall bring thy
destruct among the nations, into the countri which thou hast not
known.

32:10 yea, I will make mani peopl amaz at thee, and their kings
shal be horribl afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword
befor them; and they shall trembl at everi moment, everi man for his
own life, in the day of thi fall.

32:11 for thu saith the lord god; the sword of the king of babylon
shal come upon thee.

32:12 By the sword of the mighti will I caus thi multitud to fall,
th terribl of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the
pomp of egypt, and all the multitud thereof shall be destroyed.

32:13 I will destroy also all the beast thereof from besid the great
waters; neither shall the foot of man troubl them ani more, nor the
hoof of beast troubl them.

32:14 then will I make their water deep, and caus their river to
run like oil, saith the lord god.

32:15 when I shall make the land of egypt desolate, and the country
shal be destitut of that whereof it wa full, when I shall smite all
them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am the lord.

32:16 thi is the lament wherewith they shall lament her: the
daught of the nation shall lament her: they shall lament for her,
even for egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the lord god.

32:17 It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day
of the month, that the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 32:18
son of man, wail for the multitud of egypt, and cast them down, even
her, and the daughter of the famou nations, unto the nether part of
th earth, with them that go down into the pit.

32:19 whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with
th uncircumcised.

32:20 they shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the
sword: she is deliv to the sword: draw her and all her multitudes.

32:21 the strong among the mighti shall speak to him out of the midst
of hell with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie
uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

32:22 asshur is there and all her company: hi grave are about him:
al of them slain, fallen by the sword: 32:23 whose grave are set in
th side of the pit, and her compani is round about her grave: all of
them slain, fallen by the sword, which caus terror in the land of
th living.

32:24 there is elam and all her multitud round about her grave, all
of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised
into the nether part of the earth, which caus their terror in the
land of the living; yet have they born their shame with them that go
down to the pit.

32:25 they have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her
multitude: her grave are round about him: all of them uncircumcised,
slain by the sword: though their terror wa caus in the land of the
living, yet have they born their shame with them that go down to the
pit: he is put in the midst of them that be slain.

32:26 there is meshech, tubal, and all her multitude: her grave are
round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though
they caus their terror in the land of the living.

32:27 and they shall not lie with the mighti that are fallen of the
uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapon of war:
and they have laid their sword under their heads, but their
iniqu shall be upon their bones, though they were the terror of
th mighti in the land of the living.

32:28 yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and
shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword.

32:29 there is edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their
might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shall lie
with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.

32:30 there be the princ of the north, all of them, and all the
zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they
ar asham of their might; and they lie uncircumcis with them that
b slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to
th pit.

32:31 pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comfort over all his
multitude, even pharaoh and all hi armi slain by the sword, saith the
lord god.

32:32 for I have caus my terror in the land of the living: and he
shal be laid in the midst of the uncircumcis with them that are
slain with the sword, even pharaoh and all hi multitude, saith the
lord god.

33:1 again the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 33:2 son of man,
speak to the children of thi people, and say unto them, when I bring
th sword upon a land, if the peopl of the land take a man of their
coasts, and set him for their watchman: 33:3 If when he seeth the
sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;
33:4 then whosoev heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not
warning; if the sword come, and take him away, hi blood shall be upon
hi own head.

33:5 He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his
blood shall be upon him. but he that taketh warn shall deliv his
soul.

33:6 but if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet,
and the peopl be not warned; if the sword come, and take ani person
from among them, he is taken away in hi iniquity; but hi blood will
i requir at the watchman' hand.

33:7 So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house
of israel; therefor thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn
them from me.

33:8 when I say unto the wicked, O wick man, thou shalt sure die;
if thou dost not speak to warn the wick from hi way, that wicked
man shall die in hi iniquity; but hi blood will I requir at thine
hand.

33:9 nevertheless, if thou warn the wick of hi way to turn from it;
if he do not turn from hi way, he shall die in hi iniquity; but thou
hast deliv thi soul.

33:10 therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the hous of israel;
thu ye speak, saying, If our transgress and our sin be upon us,
and we pine away in them, how should we then live?  33:11 say unto
them, As I live, saith the lord god, I have no pleasur in the death
of the wicked; but that the wick turn from hi way and live: turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for whi will ye die, O hous of
israel?  33:12 therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of
thi people, the righteous of the righteou shall not deliv him
in the day of hi transgression: as for the wicked of the wicked,
h shall not fall therebi in the day that he turneth from his
wickedness; neither shall the righteou be abl to live for his
right in the day that he sinneth.

33:13 when I shall say to the righteous, that he shall sure live; if
h trust to hi own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
right shall not be remembered; but for hi iniqu that he
hath committed, he shall die for it.

33:14 again, when I say unto the wicked, thou shalt sure die; if he
turn from hi sin, and do that which is law and right; 33:15 If the
wick restor the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the
statut of life, without commit iniquity; he shall sure live,
h shall not die.

33:16 none of hi sin that he hath commit shall be mention unto
him: he hath done that which is law and right; he shall surely
live.

33:17 yet the children of thi peopl say, the way of the lord is not
equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

33:18 when the righteou turneth from hi righteousness, and
committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.

33:19 but if the wick turn from hi wickedness, and do that which is
law and right, he shall live thereby.

33:20 yet ye say, the way of the lord is not equal. O ye hous of
israel, I will judg you everi one after hi ways.

33:21 and it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the
tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped
out of jerusalem came unto me, saying, the citi is smitten.

33:22 now the hand of the lord wa upon me in the evening, afor he
that wa escap came; and had open my mouth, until he came to me in
th morning; and my mouth wa opened, and I wa no more dumb.

33:23 then the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 33:24 son of
man, they that inhabit those wast of the land of israel speak,
saying, abraham wa one, and he inherit the land: but we are many;
th land is given us for inheritance.

33:25 wherefor say unto them, thu saith the lord god; Ye eat with
th blood, and lift up your eye toward your idols, and shed blood:
and shall ye possess the land?  33:26 Ye stand upon your sword, ye
work abomination, and ye defil everi one hi neighbour' wife: and
shal ye possess the land?  33:27 say thou thu unto them, thu saith
th lord god; As I live, sure they that are in the wast shall fall
bi the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the
beast to be devoured, and they that be in the fort and in the caves
shal die of the pestilence.

33:28 for I will lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her
strength shall cease; and the mountain of israel shall be desolate,
that none shall pass through.

33:29 then shall they know that I am the lord, when I have laid the
land most desol becaus of all their abomin which they have
committed.

33:30 also, thou son of man, the children of thi peopl still are
talk against thee by the wall and in the door of the houses, and
speak one to another, everi one to hi brother, saying, come, I pray
you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the lord.

33:31 and they come unto thee as the peopl cometh, and they sit
befor thee as my people, and they hear thi words, but they will not
do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart
goeth after their covetousness.

33:32 and, lo, thou art unto them as a veri love song of one that
hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they
hear thi words, but they do them not.

33:33 and when thi cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall
they know that a prophet hath been among them.

34:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 34:2 son of man,
prophesi against the shepherd of israel, prophesy, and say unto them,
thu saith the lord god unto the shepherds; woe be to the shepherd of
israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherd feed the
flocks?  34:3 Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool, ye kill
them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.

34:4 the diseas have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed
that which wa sick, neither have ye bound up that which wa broken,
neith have ye brought again that which wa driven away, neither have
y sought that which wa lost; but with forc and with cruelti have ye
rul them.

34:5 and they were scattered, becaus there is no shepherd: and they
becam meat to all the beast of the field, when they were scattered.

34:6 My sheep wander through all the mountains, and upon everi high
hill: yea, my flock wa scatter upon all the face of the earth, and
non did search or seek after them.

34:7 therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the lord; 34:8 As i
live, saith the lord god, sure becaus my flock becam a prey, and
mi flock becam meat to everi beast of the field, becaus there wa no
shepherd, neither did my shepherd search for my flock, but the
shepherd fed themselves, and fed not my flock; 34:9 therefore, O ye
shepherds, hear the word of the lord; 34:10 thu saith the lord god;
behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will requir my flock at
their hand, and caus them to ceas from feed the flock; neither
shal the shepherd feed themselv ani more; for I will deliv my
flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.

34:11 for thu saith the lord god; behold, I, even I, will both search
mi sheep, and seek them out.

34:12 As a shepherd seeketh out hi flock in the day that he is among
hi sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will
deliv them out of all place where they have been scatter in the
cloudi and dark day.

34:13 and I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from
th countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them
upon the mountain of israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited
plac of the country.

34:14 I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains
of israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold,
and in a fat pastur shall they feed upon the mountain of israel.

34:15 I will feed my flock, and I will caus them to lie down, saith
th lord god.

34:16 I will seek that which wa lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, and will bind up that which wa broken, and will
strengthen that which wa sick: but I will destroy the fat and the
strong; I will feed them with judgment.

34:17 and as for you, O my flock, thu saith the lord god; behold, i
judg between cattl and cattle, between the ram and the he goats.

34:18 seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good
pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residu of your
pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the
residu with your feet?  34:19 and as for my flock, they eat that
which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye
hav foul with your feet.

34:20 therefor thu saith the lord god unto them; behold, I, even i,
wil judg between the fat cattl and between the lean cattle.

34:21 becaus ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed
al the diseas with your horns, till ye have scatter them abroad;
34:22 therefor will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a
prey; and I will judg between cattl and cattle.

34:23 and I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant david; he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd.

34:24 and I the lord will be their god, and my servant david a prince
among them; I the lord have spoken it.

34:25 and I will make with them a coven of peace, and will cause
th evil beast to ceas out of the land: and they shall dwell safely
in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

34:26 and I will make them and the place round about my hill a
blessing; and I will caus the shower to come down in hi season;
ther shall be shower of blessing.

34:27 and the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth
shal yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their land, and
shal know that I am the lord, when I have broken the band of their
yoke, and deliv them out of the hand of those that served
themselv of them.

34:28 and they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall
th beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and
non shall make them afraid.

34:29 and I will rais up for them a plant of renown, and they shall
b no more consum with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of
th heathen ani more.

34:30 thu shall they know that I the lord their god am with them, and
that they, even the hous of israel, are my people, saith the lord
god.

34:31 and ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your
god, saith the lord god.

35:1 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 35:2 son of
man, set thi face against mount seir, and prophesi against it, 35:3
and say unto it, thu saith the lord god; behold, O mount seir, I am
against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and i
wil make thee most desolate.

35:4 I will lay thi citi waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou
shalt know that I am the lord.

35:5 becaus thou hast had a perpetu hatred, and hast shed the blood
of the children of israel by the forc of the sword in the time of
their calamity, in the time that their iniqu had an end: 35:6
therefore, as I live, saith the lord god, I will prepar thee unto
blood, and blood shall pursu thee: sith thou hast not hate blood,
even blood shall pursu thee.

35:7 thu will I make mount seir most desolate, and cut off from it
him that passeth out and him that returneth.

35:8 and I will fill hi mountain with hi slain men: in thi hills,
and in thi valleys, and in all thi rivers, shall they fall that are
slain with the sword.

35:9 I will make thee perpetu desolations, and thi citi shall not
return: and ye shall know that I am the lord.

35:10 becaus thou hast said, these two nation and these two
countri shall be mine, and we will possess it; wherea the lord was
there: 35:11 therefore, as I live, saith the lord god, I will even do
accord to thine anger, and accord to thine envi which thou hast
us out of thi hatr against them; and I will make myself known
among them, when I have judg thee.

35:12 and thou shalt know that I am the lord, and that I have heard
al thi blasphemi which thou hast spoken against the mountain of
israel, saying, they are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.

35:13 thu with your mouth ye have boast against me, and have
multipli your word against me: I have heard them.

35:14 thu saith the lord god; when the whole earth rejoiceth, I will
mak thee desolate.

35:15 As thou didst rejoic at the inherit of the hous of israel,
becaus it wa desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be
desolate, O mount seir, and all idumea, even all of it: and they shall
know that I am the lord.

36:1 also, thou son of man, prophesi unto the mountain of israel, and
say, Ye mountain of israel, hear the word of the lord: 36:2 thus
saith the lord god; becaus the enemi hath said against you, aha, even
th ancient high place are our in possession: 36:3 therefore
prophesi and say, thu saith the lord god; becaus they have made you
desolate, and swallow you up on everi side, that ye might be a
possess unto the residu of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the
lip of talkers, and are an infami of the people: 36:4 therefore, ye
mountain of israel, hear the word of the lord god; thu saith the
lord god to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the
valleys, to the desol wastes, and to the citi that are forsaken,
which becam a prey and deris to the residu of the heathen that
ar round about; 36:5 therefor thu saith the lord god; sure in the
fir of my jealousi have I spoken against the residu of the heathen,
and against all idumea, which have appoint my land into their
possess with the joy of all their heart, with despit minds, to
cast it out for a prey.

36:6 prophesi therefor concern the land of israel, and say unto
th mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys,
thu saith the lord god; behold, I have spoken in my jealousi and in
mi fury, becaus ye have born the shame of the heathen: 36:7
therefor thu saith the lord god; I have lift up mine hand, surely
th heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.

36:8 but ye, O mountain of israel, ye shall shoot forth your
branches, and yield your fruit to my peopl of israel; for they are at
hand to come.

36:9 for, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall
b till and sown: 36:10 and I will multipli men upon you, all the
hous of israel, even all of it: and the citi shall be inhabited,
and the wast shall be builded: 36:11 and I will multipli upon you
man and beast; and they shall increas and bring fruit: and I will
settl you after your old estates, and will do better unto you than at
your beginnings: and ye shall know that I am the lord.

36:12 yea, I will caus men to walk upon you, even my peopl israel;
and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and
thou shalt no more henceforth bereav them of men.

36:13 thu saith the lord god; becaus they say unto you, thou land
devourest up men, and hast bereav thi nations: 36:14 therefor thou
shalt devour men no more, neither bereav thi nation ani more, saith
th lord god.

36:15 neither will I caus men to hear in thee the shame of the
heathen ani more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people
ani more, neither shalt thou caus thi nation to fall ani more, saith
th lord god.

36:16 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 36:17 son of
man, when the hous of israel dwelt in their own land, they defil it
bi their own way and by their doings: their way wa befor me as the
unclean of a remov woman.

36:18 wherefor I pour my furi upon them for the blood that they had
sh upon the land, and for their idol wherewith they had polluted
it: 36:19 and I scatter them among the heathen, and they were
dispers through the countries: accord to their way and according
to their do I judg them.

36:20 and when they enter unto the heathen, whither they went, they
profan my holi name, when they said to them, these are the peopl of
th lord, and are gone forth out of hi land.

36:21 but I had piti for mine holi name, which the hous of israel had
profan among the heathen, whither they went.

36:22 therefor say unto the hous of israel, thu saith the lord god;
i do not thi for your sakes, O hous of israel, but for mine holy
name' sake, which ye have profan among the heathen, whither ye
went.

36:23 and I will sanctifi my great name, which wa profan among the
heathen, which ye have profan in the midst of them; and the heathen
shal know that I am the lord, saith the lord god, when I shall be
sanctifi in you befor their eyes.

36:24 for I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out
of all countries, and will bring you into your own land.

36:25 then will I sprinkl clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will i
cleans you.

36:26 A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you: and I will take away the stoni heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh.

36:27 and I will put my spirit within you, and caus you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

36:28 and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and
y shall be my people, and I will be your god.

36:29 I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will
cal for the corn, and will increas it, and lay no famin upon you.

36:30 and I will multipli the fruit of the tree, and the increas of
th field, that ye shall receiv no more reproach of famin among the
heathen.

36:31 then shall ye rememb your own evil ways, and your do that
wer not good, and shall loth yourselv in your own sight for your
iniqu and for your abominations.

36:32 not for your sake do I this, saith the lord god, be it known
unto you: be asham and confound for your own ways, O hous of
israel.

36:33 thu saith the lord god; In the day that I shall have cleansed
y from all your iniqu I will also caus you to dwell in the
cities, and the wast shall be builded.

36:34 and the desol land shall be tilled, wherea it lay desolate
in the sight of all that pass by.

36:35 and they shall say, thi land that wa desol is becom like
th garden of eden; and the wast and desol and ruin citi are
becom fenced, and are inhabited.

36:36 then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that i
th lord build the ruin places, and plant that that wa desolate: i
th lord have spoken it, and I will do it.

36:37 thu saith the lord god; I will yet for thi be enquir of by
th hous of israel, to do it for them; I will increas them with men
lik a flock.

36:38 As the holi flock, as the flock of jerusalem in her solemn
feasts; so shall the wast citi be fill with flock of men: and
they shall know that I am the lord.

37:1 the hand of the lord wa upon me, and carri me out in the
spirit of the lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which
wa full of bones, 37:2 and caus me to pass by them round about:
and, behold, there were veri mani in the open valley; and, lo, they
wer veri dry.

37:3 and he said unto me, son of man, can these bone live? and i
answered, O lord god, thou knowest.

37:4 again he said unto me, prophesi upon these bones, and say unto
them, O ye dri bones, hear the word of the lord.

37:5 thu saith the lord god unto these bones; behold, I will cause
breath to enter into you, and ye shall live: 37:6 and I will lay
sinew upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with
skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that
i am the lord.

37:7 So I prophesi as I wa commanded: and as I prophesied, there
wa a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bone came together, bone
to hi bone.

37:8 and when I beheld, lo, the sinew and the flesh came up upon
them, and the skin cover them above: but there wa no breath in
them.

37:9 then said he unto me, prophesi unto the wind, prophesy, son of
man, and say to the wind, thu saith the lord god; come from the four
winds, O breath, and breath upon these slain, that they may live.

37:10 So I prophesi as he command me, and the breath came into
them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceed great
army.

37:11 then he said unto me, son of man, these bone are the whole
hous of israel: behold, they say, our bone are dried, and our hope
i lost: we are cut off for our parts.

37:12 therefor prophesi and say unto them, thu saith the lord god;
behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and caus you to come up
out of your graves, and bring you into the land of israel.

37:13 and ye shall know that I am the lord, when I have open your
graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, 37:14 and
shal put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you
in your own land: then shall ye know that I the lord have spoken it,
and perform it, saith the lord.

37:15 the word of the lord came again unto me, saying, 37:16 moreover,
th son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, for judah,
and for the children of israel hi companions: then take another
stick, and write upon it, for joseph, the stick of ephraim and for all
th hous of israel hi companions: 37:17 and join them one to another
into one stick; and they shall becom one in thine hand.

37:18 and when the children of thi peopl shall speak unto thee,
saying, wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?  37:19 say
unto them, thu saith the lord god; behold, I will take the stick of
joseph, which is in the hand of ephraim, and the tribe of israel his
fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of judah, and
mak them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

37:20 and the stick whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand
befor their eyes.

37:21 and say unto them, thu saith the lord god; behold, I will take
th children of israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone,
and will gather them on everi side, and bring them into their own
land: 37:22 and I will make them one nation in the land upon the
mountain of israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they
shal be no more two nations, neither shall they be divid into two
kingdom ani more at all.

37:23 neither shall they defil themselv ani more with their idols,
nor with their detest things, nor with ani of their
transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces,
wherein they have sinned, and will cleans them: so shall they be my
people, and I will be their god.

37:24 and david my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall
hav one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe
mi statutes, and do them.

37:25 and they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto jacob my
servant, wherein your father have dwelt; and they shall dwell
therein, even they, and their children, and their children' children
for ever: and my servant david shall be their princ for ever.

37:26 moreov I will make a coven of peac with them; it shall be
an everlast coven with them: and I will place them, and multiply
them, and will set my sanctuari in the midst of them for evermore.

37:27 My tabernacl also shall be with them: yea, I will be their god,
and they shall be my people.

37:28 and the heathen shall know that I the lord do sanctifi israel,
when my sanctuari shall be in the midst of them for evermore.

38:1 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 38:2 son of man,
set thi face against gog, the land of magog, the chief princ of
meshech and tubal, and prophesi against him, 38:3 and say, thu saith
th lord god; behold, I am against thee, O gog, the chief princ of
meshech and tubal: 38:4 and I will turn thee back, and put hook into
thi jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, hors and
horsemen, all of them cloth with all sort of armour, even a great
compani with buckler and shields, all of them handl swords: 38:5
persia, ethiopia, and libya with them; all of them with shield and
helmet: 38:6 gomer, and all hi bands; the hous of togarmah of the
north quarters, and all hi bands: and mani peopl with thee.

38:7 Be thou prepared, and prepar for thyself, thou, and all thy
compani that are assembl unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.

38:8 after mani day thou shalt be visited: in the latter year thou
shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is
gath out of mani people, against the mountain of israel, which
hav been alway waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations,
and they shall dwell safe all of them.

38:9 thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a
cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thi bands, and mani peopl with
thee.

38:10 thu saith the lord god; It shall also come to pass, that at the
sam time shall thing come into thi mind, and thou shalt think an
evil thought: 38:11 and thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of
unwal villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell
safely, all of them dwell without walls, and have neither bars
nor gates, 38:12 To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine
hand upon the desol place that are now inhabited, and upon the
peopl that are gather out of the nations, which have gotten cattle
and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.

38:13 sheba, and dedan, and the merchant of tarshish, with all the
young lion thereof, shall say unto thee, art thou come to take a
spoil? hast thou gather thi compani to take a prey? to carri away
silv and gold, to take away cattl and goods, to take a great spoil?
38:14 therefore, son of man, prophesi and say unto gog, thu saith the
lord god; In that day when my peopl of israel dwelleth safely, shalt
thou not know it?  38:15 and thou shalt come from thi place out of the
north parts, thou, and mani peopl with thee, all of them ride upon
horses, a great company, and a mighti army: 38:16 and thou shalt come
up against my peopl of israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall
b in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the
heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctifi in thee, O gog, before
their eyes.

38:17 thu saith the lord god; art thou he of whom I have spoken in
old time by my servant the prophet of israel, which prophesi in
thos day mani year that I would bring thee against them?  38:18 and
it shall come to pass at the same time when gog shall come against the
land of israel, saith the lord god, that my furi shall come up in my
face.

38:19 for in my jealousi and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken,
sur in that day there shall be a great shake in the land of
israel; 38:20 So that the fish of the sea, and the fowl of the
heaven, and the beast of the field, and all creep thing that
creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the
earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountain shall be thrown
down, and the steep place shall fall, and everi wall shall fall to
th ground.

38:21 and I will call for a sword against him throughout all my
mountains, saith the lord god: everi man' sword shall be against his
brother.

38:22 and I will plead against him with pestil and with blood; and
i will rain upon him, and upon hi bands, and upon the mani people
that are with him, an overflow rain, and great hailstones, fire,
and brimstone.

38:23 thu will I magnifi myself, and sanctifi myself; and I will be
known in the eye of mani nations, and they shall know that I am the
lord.

39:1 therefore, thou son of man, prophesi against gog, and say, thus
saith the lord god; behold, I am against thee, O gog, the chief prince
of meshech and tubal: 39:2 and I will turn thee back, and leav but
th sixth part of thee, and will caus thee to come up from the north
parts, and will bring thee upon the mountain of israel: 39:3 and i
wil smite thi bow out of thi left hand, and will caus thine arrows
to fall out of thi right hand.

39:4 thou shalt fall upon the mountain of israel, thou, and all thy
bands, and the peopl that is with thee: I will give thee unto the
raven bird of everi sort, and to the beast of the field to be
devoured.

39:5 thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith
th lord god.

39:6 and I will send a fire on magog, and among them that dwell
carelessli in the isles: and they shall know that I am the lord.

39:7 So will I make my holi name known in the midst of my people
israel; and I will not let them pollut my holi name ani more: and the
heathen shall know that I am the lord, the holi one in israel.

39:8 behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the lord god; thi is
th day whereof I have spoken.

39:9 and they that dwell in the citi of israel shall go forth, and
shal set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shield and the
bucklers, the bow and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears,
and they shall burn them with fire seven years: 39:10 So that they
shal take no wood out of the field, neither cut down ani out of the
forests; for they shall burn the weapon with fire: and they shall
spoil those that spoil them, and rob those that rob them, saith
th lord god.

39:11 and it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto gog
a place there of grave in israel, the valley of the passeng on the
east of the sea: and it shall stop the nose of the passengers: and
ther shall they buri gog and all hi multitude: and they shall call
it the valley of hamongog.

39:12 and seven month shall the hous of israel be buri of them,
that they may cleans the land.

39:13 yea, all the peopl of the land shall buri them; and it shall be
to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified, saith the lord
god.

39:14 and they shall sever out men of continu employment, passing
through the land to buri with the passeng those that remain upon
th face of the earth, to cleans it: after the end of seven months
shal they search.

39:15 and the passeng that pass through the land, when ani seeth a
man' bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the burier have
buri it in the valley of hamongog.

39:16 and also the name of the citi shall be hamonah. thu shall they
cleans the land.

39:17 and, thou son of man, thu saith the lord god; speak unto every
feath fowl, and to everi beast of the field, assembl yourselves,
and come; gather yourselv on everi side to my sacrific that I do
sacrific for you, even a great sacrific upon the mountain of
israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

39:18 Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the
princ of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks,
al of them fatl of bashan.

39:19 and ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be
drunken, of my sacrific which I have sacrif for you.

39:20 thu ye shall be fill at my tabl with hors and chariots,
with mighti men, and with all men of war, saith the lord god.

39:21 and I will set my glori among the heathen, and all the heathen
shal see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have
laid upon them.

39:22 So the hous of israel shall know that I am the lord their god
from that day and forward.

39:23 and the heathen shall know that the hous of israel went into
capt for their iniquity: becaus they trespass against me,
therefor hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of
their enemies: so fell they all by the sword.

39:24 accord to their unclean and accord to their
transgress have I done unto them, and hid my face from them.

39:25 therefor thu saith the lord god; now will I bring again the
capt of jacob, and have merci upon the whole hous of israel, and
wil be jealou for my holi name; 39:26 after that they have borne
their shame, and all their trespass wherebi they have trespassed
against me, when they dwelt safe in their land, and none made them
afraid.

39:27 when I have brought them again from the people, and gathered
them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctifi in them in the
sight of mani nations; 39:28 then shall they know that I am the lord
their god, which caus them to be led into captiv among the
heathen: but I have gather them unto their own land, and have left
non of them ani more there.

39:29 neither will I hide my face ani more from them: for I have
pour out my spirit upon the hous of israel, saith the lord god.

40:1 In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning
of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year
aft that the citi wa smitten, in the selfsam day the hand of the
lord wa upon me, and brought me thither.

40:2 In the vision of god brought he me into the land of israel, and
set me upon a veri high mountain, by which wa as the frame of a city
on the south.

40:3 and he brought me thither, and, behold, there wa a man, whose
appear wa like the appear of brass, with a line of flax in
hi hand, and a measur reed; and he stood in the gate.

40:4 and the man said unto me, son of man, behold with thine eyes, and
hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew
thee; for to the intent that I might shew them unto thee art thou
brought hither: declar all that thou seest to the hous of israel.

40:5 and behold a wall on the outsid of the hous round about, and in
th man' hand a measur reed of six cubit long by the cubit and an
hand breadth: so he measur the breadth of the building, one reed;
and the height, one reed.

40:6 then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and
went up the stair thereof, and measur the threshold of the gate,
which wa one reed broad; and the other threshold of the gate, which
wa one reed broad.

40:7 and everi littl chamber wa one reed long, and one reed broad;
and between the littl chamber were five cubits; and the threshold of
th gate by the porch of the gate within wa one reed.

40:8 He measur also the porch of the gate within, one reed.

40:9 then measur he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the
post thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate wa inward.

40:10 and the littl chamber of the gate eastward were three on this
side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure: and the
post had one measur on thi side and on that side.

40:11 and he measur the breadth of the entri of the gate, ten
cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits.

40:12 the space also befor the littl chamber wa one cubit on this
side, and the space wa one cubit on that side: and the little
chamb were six cubit on thi side, and six cubit on that side.

40:13 He measur then the gate from the roof of one littl chamber to
th roof of another: the breadth wa five and twenti cubits, door
against door.

40:14 He made also post of threescor cubits, even unto the post of
th court round about the gate.

40:15 and from the face of the gate of the entranc unto the face of
th porch of the inner gate were fifti cubits.

40:16 and there were narrow window to the littl chambers, and to
their post within the gate round about, and likewis to the arches:
and window were round about inward: and upon each post were palm
trees.

40:17 then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, there were
chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty
chamb were upon the pavement.

40:18 and the pavement by the side of the gate over against the
length of the gate wa the lower pavement.

40:19 then he measur the breadth from the forefront of the lower
g unto the forefront of the inner court without, an hundr cubits
eastward and northward.

40:20 and the gate of the outward court that look toward the north,
h measur the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.

40:21 and the littl chamber thereof were three on thi side and
thre on that side; and the post thereof and the arch thereof were
aft the measur of the first gate: the length thereof wa fifty
cubits, and the breadth five and twenti cubits.

40:22 and their windows, and their arches, and their palm trees, were
aft the measur of the gate that looketh toward the east; and they
went up unto it by seven steps; and the arch thereof were before
them.

40:23 and the gate of the inner court wa over against the gate toward
th north, and toward the east; and he measur from gate to gate an
hundr cubits.

40:24 after that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate
toward the south: and he measur the post thereof and the arches
thereof accord to these measures.

40:25 and there were window in it and in the arch thereof round
about, like those windows: the length wa fifti cubits, and the
breadth five and twenti cubits.

40:26 and there were seven step to go up to it, and the arches
thereof were befor them: and it had palm trees, one on thi side, and
anoth on that side, upon the post thereof.

40:27 and there wa a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he
measur from gate to gate toward the south an hundr cubits.

40:28 and he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he
measur the south gate accord to these measures; 40:29 and the
littl chamber thereof, and the post thereof, and the arches
thereof, accord to these measures: and there were window in it and
in the arch thereof round about: it wa fifti cubit long, and five
and twenti cubit broad.

40:30 and the arch round about were five and twenti cubit long, and
fiv cubit broad.

40:31 and the arch thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
tre were upon the post thereof: and the go up to it had eight
steps.

40:32 and he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he
measur the gate accord to these measures.

40:33 and the littl chamber thereof, and the post thereof, and the
arch thereof, were accord to these measures: and there were
window therein and in the arch thereof round about: it wa fifty
cubit long, and five and twenti cubit broad.

40:34 and the arch thereof were toward the outward court; and palm
tre were upon the post thereof, on thi side, and on that side: and
th go up to it had eight steps.

40:35 and he brought me to the north gate, and measur it according
to these measures; 40:36 the littl chamber thereof, the posts
thereof, and the arch thereof, and the window to it round about:
th length wa fifti cubits, and the breadth five and twenti cubits.

40:37 and the post thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
tre were upon the post thereof, on thi side, and on that side: and
th go up to it had eight steps.

40:38 and the chamber and the entri thereof were by the post of
th gates, where they wash the burnt offering.

40:39 and in the porch of the gate were two tabl on thi side, and
two tabl on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offer and the
sin offer and the trespass offering.

40:40 and at the side without, as one goeth up to the entri of the
north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which wa at the
porch of the gate, were two tables.

40:41 four tabl were on thi side, and four tabl on that side, by
th side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their
sacrifices.

40:42 and the four tabl were of hewn stone for the burnt offering,
of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one
cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instrument wherewith they
slew the burnt offer and the sacrifice.

40:43 and within were hooks, an hand broad, fasten round about: and
upon the tabl wa the flesh of the offering.

40:44 and without the inner gate were the chamber of the singer in
th inner court, which wa at the side of the north gate; and their
prospect wa toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having
th prospect toward the north.

40:45 and he said unto me, thi chamber, whose prospect is toward the
south, is for the priests, the keeper of the charg of the house.

40:46 and the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the
priests, the keeper of the charg of the altar: these are the son of
zadok among the son of levi, which come near to the lord to minister
unto him.

40:47 So he measur the court, an hundr cubit long, and an hundred
cubit broad, foursquare; and the altar that wa befor the house.

40:48 and he brought me to the porch of the house, and measur each
post of the porch, five cubit on thi side, and five cubit on that
side: and the breadth of the gate wa three cubit on thi side, and
thre cubit on that side.

40:49 the length of the porch wa twenti cubits, and the breadth
eleven cubits, and he brought me by the step wherebi they went up to
it: and there were pillar by the posts, one on thi side, and another
on that side.

41:1 afterward he brought me to the temple, and measur the posts,
six cubit broad on the one side, and six cubit broad on the other
side, which wa the breadth of the tabernacle.

41:2 and the breadth of the door wa ten cubits; and the side of the
door were five cubit on the one side, and five cubit on the other
side: and he measur the length thereof, forti cubits: and the
breadth, twenti cubits.

41:3 then went he inward, and measur the post of the door, two
cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven
cubits.

41:4 So he measur the length thereof, twenti cubits; and the
breadth, twenti cubits, befor the temple: and he said unto me, this
i the most holi place.

41:5 after he measur the wall of the house, six cubits; and the
breadth of everi side chamber, four cubits, round about the hous on
everi side.

41:6 and the side chamber were three, one over another, and thirti in
order; and they enter into the wall which wa of the hous for the
sid chamber round about, that they might have hold, but they had not
hold in the wall of the house.

41:7 and there wa an enlarging, and a wind about still upward to
th side chambers: for the wind about of the hous went still
upward round about the house: therefor the breadth of the hous was
stil upward, and so increas from the lowest chamber to the highest
bi the midst.

41:8 I saw also the height of the hous round about: the foundations
of the side chamber were a full reed of six great cubits.

41:9 the thick of the wall, which wa for the side chamber
without, wa five cubits: and that which wa left wa the place of the
sid chamber that were within.

41:10 and between the chamber wa the wide of twenti cubit round
about the hous on everi side.

41:11 and the door of the side chamber were toward the place that
wa left, one door toward the north, and anoth door toward the
south: and the breadth of the place that wa left wa five cubits
round about.

41:12 now the build that wa befor the separ place at the end
toward the west wa seventi cubit broad; and the wall of the building
wa five cubit thick round about, and the length thereof ninety
cubits.

41:13 So he measur the house, an hundr cubit long; and the
separ place, and the building, with the wall thereof, an hundred
cubit long; 41:14 also the breadth of the face of the house, and of
th separ place toward the east, an hundr cubits.

41:15 and he measur the length of the build over against the
separ place which wa behind it, and the galleri thereof on the
on side and on the other side, an hundr cubits, with the inner
temple, and the porch of the court; 41:16 the door posts, and the
narrow windows, and the galleri round about on their three stories,
ov against the door, ciel with wood round about, and from the
ground up to the windows, and the window were covered; 41:17 To that
abov the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and by all the
wal round about within and without, by measure.

41:18 and it wa made with cherubim and palm trees, so that a palm
tre wa between a cherub and a cherub; and everi cherub had two
faces; 41:19 So that the face of a man wa toward the palm tree on the
on side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the
oth side: it wa made through all the hous round about.

41:20 from the ground unto abov the door were cherubim and palm
tre made, and on the wall of the temple.

41:21 the post of the templ were squared, and the face of the
sanctuary; the appear of the one as the appear of the other.

41:22 the altar of wood wa three cubit high, and the length thereof
two cubits; and the corner thereof, and the length thereof, and the
wal thereof, were of wood: and he said unto me, thi is the table
that is befor the lord.

41:23 and the templ and the sanctuari had two doors.

41:24 and the door had two leav apiece, two turn leaves; two
leav for the one door, and two leav for the other door.

41:25 and there were made on them, on the door of the temple,
cherubim and palm trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there
wer thick plank upon the face of the porch without.

41:26 and there were narrow window and palm tree on the one side and
on the other side, on the side of the porch, and upon the side
chamb of the house, and thick planks.

42:1 then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the
north: and he brought me into the chamber that wa over against the
separ place, and which wa befor the build toward the north.

42:2 befor the length of an hundr cubit wa the north door, and
th breadth wa fifti cubits.

42:3 over against the twenti cubit which were for the inner court,
and over against the pavement which wa for the utter court, was
galleri against galleri in three stories.

42:4 and befor the chamber wa a walk to ten cubit breadth inward,
a way of one cubit; and their door toward the north.

42:5 now the upper chamber were shorter: for the galleri were
high than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the
building.

42:6 for they were in three stories, but had not pillar as the
pillar of the courts: therefor the build wa straiten more than
th lowest and the middlemost from the ground.

42:7 and the wall that wa without over against the chambers, toward
th utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof
wa fifti cubits.

42:8 for the length of the chamber that were in the utter court was
fifti cubits: and, lo, befor the templ were an hundr cubits.

42:9 and from under these chamber wa the entri on the east side, as
on goeth into them from the utter court.

42:10 the chamber were in the thick of the wall of the court
toward the east, over against the separ place, and over against the
building.

42:11 and the way befor them wa like the appear of the chambers
which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they:
and all their go out were both accord to their fashions, and
accord to their doors.

42:12 and accord to the door of the chamber that were toward the
south wa a door in the head of the way, even the way directli before
th wall toward the east, as one entereth into them.

42:13 then said he unto me, the north chamber and the south chambers,
which are befor the separ place, they be holi chambers, where the
priest that approach unto the lord shall eat the most holi things:
ther shall they lay the most holi things, and the meat offering, and
th sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place is holy.

42:14 when the priest enter therein, then shall they not go out of
th holi place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their
gar wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on
oth garments, and shall approach to those thing which are for the
people.

42:15 now when he had made an end of measur the inner house, he
brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east,
and measur it round about.

42:16 He measur the east side with the measur reed, five hundred
reeds, with the measur reed round about.

42:17 He measur the north side, five hundr reeds, with the
measur reed round about.

42:18 He measur the south side, five hundr reeds, with the
measur reed.

42:19 He turn about to the west side, and measur five hundred
re with the measur reed.

42:20 He measur it by the four sides: it had a wall round about,
f hundr reed long, and five hundr broad, to make a separation
between the sanctuari and the profan place.

43:1 afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh
toward the east: 43:2 and, behold, the glori of the god of israel came
from the way of the east: and hi voic wa like a nois of many
waters: and the earth shine with hi glory.

43:3 and it wa accord to the appear of the vision which I saw,
even accord to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the
city: and the vision were like the vision that I saw by the river
chebar; and I fell upon my face.

43:4 and the glori of the lord came into the hous by the way of the
gat whose prospect is toward the east.

43:5 So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court;
and, behold, the glori of the lord fill the house.

43:6 and I heard him speak unto me out of the house; and the man
stood by me.

43:7 and he said unto me, son of man, the place of my throne, and the
plac of the sole of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the
children of israel for ever, and my holi name, shall the hous of
israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their
whoredom, nor by the carcas of their king in their high places.

43:8 In their set of their threshold by my thresholds, and their
post by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even
defil my holi name by their abomin that they have committed:
wherefor I have consum them in mine anger.

43:9 now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcas of their
kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever.

43:10 thou son of man, shew the hous to the hous of israel, that
they may be asham of their iniquities: and let them measur the
pattern.

43:11 and if they be asham of all that they have done, shew them the
form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the go out
thereof, and the come in thereof, and all the form thereof, and
al the ordin thereof, and all the form thereof, and all the
law thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the
whol form thereof, and all the ordin thereof, and do them.

43:12 thi is the law of the house; upon the top of the mountain the
whol limit thereof round about shall be most holy. behold, thi is
th law of the house.

43:13 and these are the measur of the altar after the cubits: the
cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom shall be a
cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge
thereof round about shall be a span: and thi shall be the higher
plac of the altar.

43:14 and from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle
shal be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser
settl even to the greater settl shall be four cubits, and the
breadth one cubit.

43:15 So the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward
shal be four horns.

43:16 and the altar shall be twelv cubit long, twelv broad, square
in the four squar thereof.

43:17 and the settl shall be fourteen cubit long and fourteen broad
in the four squar thereof; and the border about it shall be half a
cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and hi stairs
shal look toward the east.

43:18 and he said unto me, son of man, thu saith the lord god; these
ar the ordin of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to
off burnt offer thereon, and to sprinkl blood thereon.

43:19 and thou shalt give to the priest the levit that be of the
se of zadok, which approach unto me, to minist unto me, saith the
lord god, a young bullock for a sin offering.

43:20 and thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four
horn of it, and on the four corner of the settle, and upon the
bord round about: thu shalt thou cleans and purg it.

43:21 thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he
shal burn it in the appoint place of the house, without the
sanctuary.

43:22 and on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats
without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleans the altar,
a they did cleans it with the bullock.

43:23 when thou hast made an end of cleans it, thou shalt offer a
young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without
blemish.

43:24 and thou shalt offer them befor the lord, and the priest shall
cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering
unto the lord.

43:25 seven day shalt thou prepar everi day a goat for a sin
offering: they shall also prepar a young bullock, and a ram out of
th flock, without blemish.

43:26 seven day shall they purg the altar and purifi it; and they
shal consecr themselves.

43:27 and when these day are expired, it shall be, that upon the
eighth day, and so forward, the priest shall make your burnt
off upon the altar, and your peac offerings; and I will accept
you, saith the lord god.

44:1 then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward
sanctuari which looketh toward the east; and it wa shut.

44:2 then said the lord unto me; thi gate shall be shut, it shall not
b opened, and no man shall enter in by it; becaus the lord, the god
of israel, hath enter in by it, therefor it shall be shut.

44:3 It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread
befor the lord; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate,
and shall go out by the way of the same.

44:4 then brought he me the way of the north gate befor the house:
and I looked, and, behold, the glori of the lord fill the hous of
th lord: and I fell upon my face.

44:5 and the lord said unto me, son of man, mark well, and behold with
thin eyes, and hear with thine ear all that I say unto thee
concern all the ordin of the hous of the lord, and all the
law thereof; and mark well the enter in of the house, with every
go forth of the sanctuary.

44:6 and thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the hous of
israel, thu saith the lord god; O ye hous of israel, let it suffice
y of all your abominations, 44:7 In that ye have brought into my
sanctuari strangers, uncircumcis in heart, and uncircumcis in
flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollut it, even my house, when ye
off my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my
coven becaus of all your abominations.

44:8 and ye have not kept the charg of mine holi things: but ye have
set keeper of my charg in my sanctuari for yourselves.

44:9 thu saith the lord god; No stranger, uncircumcis in heart, nor
uncircumcis in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of ani stranger
that is among the children of israel.

44:10 and the levit that are gone away far from me, when israel went
astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall
even bear their iniquity.

44:11 yet they shall be minist in my sanctuary, have charg at
th gate of the house, and minist to the house: they shall slay
th burnt offer and the sacrific for the people, and they shall
stand befor them to minist unto them.

44:12 becaus they minist unto them befor their idols, and caused
th hous of israel to fall into iniquity; therefor have I lift up
min hand against them, saith the lord god, and they shall bear their
iniquity.

44:13 and they shall not come near unto me, to do the offic of a
priest unto me, nor to come near to ani of my holi things, in the most
holi place: but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations
which they have committed.

44:14 but I will make them keeper of the charg of the house, for all
th servic thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.

44:15 but the priest the levites, the son of zadok, that kept the
charg of my sanctuari when the children of israel went astray from
me, they shall come near to me to minist unto me, and they shall
stand befor me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the lord
god: 44:16 they shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come
near to my table, to minist unto me, and they shall keep my charge.

44:17 and it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates
of the inner court, they shall be cloth with linen garments; and no
wool shall come upon them, while they minist in the gate of the
inn court, and within.

44:18 they shall have linen bonnet upon their heads, and shall have
linen breech upon their loins; they shall not gird themselv with
ani thing that causeth sweat.

44:19 and when they go forth into the utter court, even into the utter
court to the people, they shall put off their garment wherein they
ministered, and lay them in the holi chambers, and they shall put on
oth garments; and they shall not sanctifi the peopl with their
garments.

44:20 neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their lock to
grow long; they shall onli poll their heads.

44:21 neither shall ani priest drink wine, when they enter into the
inn court.

44:22 neither shall they take for their wive a widow, nor her that is
put away: but they shall take maiden of the seed of the hous of
israel, or a widow that had a priest before.

44:23 and they shall teach my peopl the differ between the holy
and profane, and caus them to discern between the unclean and the
clean.

44:24 and in controversi they shall stand in judgment; and they shall
judg it accord to my judgments: and they shall keep my law and my
statut in all mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.

44:25 and they shall come at no dead person to defil themselves: but
for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother,
or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defil themselves.

44:26 and after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.

44:27 and in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner
court, to minist in the sanctuary, he shall offer hi sin offering,
saith the lord god.

44:28 and it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I am their
inheritance: and ye shall give them no possess in israel: I am
their possession.

44:29 they shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the
trespass offering: and everi dedic thing in israel shall be
theirs.

44:30 and the first of all the firstfruit of all things, and every
obl of all, of everi sort of your oblations, shall be the
priest's: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough,
that he may caus the bless to rest in thine house.

44:31 the priest shall not eat of ani thing that is dead of itself,
or torn, whether it be fowl or beast.

45:1 moreover, when ye shall divid by lot the land for inheritance,
y shall offer an oblat unto the lord, an holi portion of the land:
th length shall be the length of five and twenti thousand reeds, and
th breadth shall be ten thousand. thi shall be holi in all the
bord thereof round about.

45:2 Of thi there shall be for the sanctuari five hundr in length,
with five hundr in breadth, squar round about; and fifti cubits
round about for the suburb thereof.

45:3 and of thi measur shalt thou measur the length of five and
twenti thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be
th sanctuari and the most holi place.

45:4 the holi portion of the land shall be for the priest the
minist of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minist unto the
lord: and it shall be a place for their houses, and an holi place for
th sanctuary.

45:5 and the five and twenti thousand of length, and the ten thousand
of breadth shall also the levites, the minist of the house, have
for themselves, for a possess for twenti chambers.

45:6 and ye shall appoint the possess of the citi five thousand
broad, and five and twenti thousand long, over against the oblat of
th holi portion: it shall be for the whole hous of israel.

45:7 and a portion shall be for the princ on the one side and on the
oth side of the oblat of the holi portion, and of the possession
of the city, befor the oblat of the holi portion, and befor the
possess of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east
sid eastward: and the length shall be over against one of the
portions, from the west border unto the east border.

45:8 In the land shall be hi possess in israel: and my princes
shal no more oppress my people; and the rest of the land shall they
giv to the hous of israel accord to their tribes.

45:9 thu saith the lord god; let it suffic you, O princ of israel:
remov violenc and spoil, and execut judgment and justice, take away
your exact from my people, saith the lord god.

45:10 Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.

45:11 the ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath
may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part
of an homer: the measur thereof shall be after the homer.

45:12 and the shekel shall be twenti gerahs: twenti shekels, five and
twenti shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.

45:13 thi is the oblat that ye shall offer; the sixth part of an
ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an
ephah of an homer of barley: 45:14 concern the ordin of oil,
th bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the
cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten bath are an homer: 45:15
and one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat
pastur of israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and
for peac offerings, to make reconcili for them, saith the lord
god.

45:16 all the peopl of the land shall give thi oblat for the
princ in israel.

45:17 and it shall be the prince' part to give burnt offerings, and
meat offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new
moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemn of the hous of israel:
h shall prepar the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the
burnt offering, and the peac offerings, to make reconcili for
th hous of israel.

45:18 thu saith the lord god; In the first month, in the first day of
th month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and
cleans the sanctuary: 45:19 and the priest shall take of the blood of
th sin offering, and put it upon the post of the house, and upon the
four corner of the settl of the altar, and upon the post of the
gat of the inner court.

45:20 and so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for everi one
that erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcil the
house.

45:21 In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall
hav the passover, a feast of seven days; unleaven bread shall be
eaten.

45:22 and upon that day shall the princ prepar for himself and for
al the peopl of the land a bullock for a sin offering.

45:23 and seven day of the feast he shall prepar a burnt offer to
th lord, seven bullock and seven ram without blemish daili the
seven days; and a kid of the goat daili for a sin offering.

45:24 and he shall prepar a meat offer of an ephah for a bullock,
and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.

45:25 In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall
h do the like in the feast of the seven days, accord to the sin
offering, accord to the burnt offering, and accord to the meat
offering, and accord to the oil.

46:1 thu saith the lord god; the gate of the inner court that looketh
toward the east shall be shut the six work days; but on the sabbath
it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.

46:2 and the princ shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate
without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests
shal prepar hi burnt offer and hi peac offerings, and he shall
worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the
gat shall not be shut until the evening.

46:3 likewis the peopl of the land shall worship at the door of this
gat befor the lord in the sabbath and in the new moons.

46:4 and the burnt offer that the princ shall offer unto the lord
in the sabbath day shall be six lamb without blemish, and a ram
without blemish.

46:5 and the meat offer shall be an ephah for a ram, and the meat
off for the lamb as he shall be abl to give, and an hin of oil
to an ephah.

46:6 and in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock
without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without
blemish.

46:7 and he shall prepar a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and
an ephah for a ram, and for the lamb accord as hi hand shall
attain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

46:8 and when the princ shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the
porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.

46:9 but when the peopl of the land shall come befor the lord in the
solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to
worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that
entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the
north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate wherebi he came
in, but shall go forth over against it.

46:10 and the princ in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go
in; and when they go forth, shall go forth.

46:11 and in the feast and in the solemn the meat offer shall
b an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lamb as
h is abl to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

46:12 now when the princ shall prepar a voluntari burnt offer or
peac offer voluntarili unto the lord, one shall then open him the
gat that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepar hi burnt
off and hi peac offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then
h shall go forth; and after hi go forth one shall shut the gate.

46:13 thou shalt daili prepar a burnt offer unto the lord of a
lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepar it every
morning.

46:14 and thou shalt prepar a meat offer for it everi morning, the
sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper
with the fine flour; a meat offer continu by a perpetual
ordin unto the lord.

46:15 thu shall they prepar the lamb, and the meat offering, and the
oil, everi morn for a continu burnt offering.

46:16 thu saith the lord god; If the princ give a gift unto ani of
hi sons, the inherit thereof shall be hi sons'; it shall be
their possess by inheritance.

46:17 but if he give a gift of hi inherit to one of hi servants,
then it shall be hi to the year of liberty; after it shall return to
th prince: but hi inherit shall be hi sons' for them.

46:18 moreov the princ shall not take of the people' inheritance
bi oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall
giv hi son inherit out of hi own possession: that my peopl be
not scatter everi man from hi possession.

46:19 after he brought me through the entry, which wa at the side of
th gate, into the holi chamber of the priests, which look toward
th north: and, behold, there wa a place on the two side westward.

46:20 then said he unto me, thi is the place where the priest shall
boil the trespass offer and the sin offering, where they shall bake
th meat offering; that they bear them not out into the utter court,
to sanctifi the people.

46:21 then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caus me to
pass by the four corner of the court; and, behold, in everi corner of
th court there wa a court.

46:22 In the four corner of the court there were court join of
forti cubit long and thirti broad: these four corner were of one
measure.

46:23 and there wa a row of build round about in them, round about
them four, and it wa made with boil place under the row round
about.

46:24 then said he unto me, these are the place of them that boil,
wher the minist of the hous shall boil the sacrific of the
people.

47:1 afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and,
behold, water issu out from under the threshold of the house
eastward: for the forefront of the hous stood toward the east, and
th water came down from under from the right side of the house, at
th south side of the altar.

47:2 then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led
m about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh
eastward; and, behold, there ran out water on the right side.

47:3 and when the man that had the line in hi hand went forth
eastward, he measur a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the
waters; the water were to the ankles.

47:4 again he measur a thousand, and brought me through the waters;
th water were to the knees. again he measur a thousand, and
brought me through; the water were to the loins.

47:5 afterward he measur a thousand; and it wa a river that I could
not pass over: for the water were risen, water to swim in, a river
that could not be pass over.

47:6 and he said unto me, son of man, hast thou seen this? then he
brought me, and caus me to return to the brink of the river.

47:7 now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were
veri mani tree on the one side and on the other.

47:8 then said he unto me, these water issu out toward the east
country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being
brought forth into the sea, the water shall be healed.

47:9 and it shall come to pass, that everi thing that liveth, which
moveth, whithersoev the river shall come, shall live: and there
shal be a veri great multitud of fish, becaus these water shall
com thither: for they shall be healed; and everi thing shall live
whith the river cometh.

47:10 and it shall come to pass, that the fisher shall stand upon it
from engedi even unto eneglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth
nets; their fish shall be accord to their kinds, as the fish of the
great sea, exceed many.

47:11 but the miri place thereof and the marish thereof shall not
b healed; they shall be given to salt.

47:12 and by the river upon the bank thereof, on thi side and on that
side, shall grow all tree for meat, whose leaf shall not fade,
neith shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new
fruit accord to hi months, becaus their water they issu out of
th sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf
thereof for medicine.

47:13 thu saith the lord god; thi shall be the border, wherebi ye
shal inherit the land accord to the twelv tribe of israel:
joseph shall have two portions.

47:14 and ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concern the
which I lift up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this
land shall fall unto you for inheritance.

47:15 and thi shall be the border of the land toward the north side,
from the great sea, the way of hethlon, as men go to zedad; 47:16
hamath, berothah, sibraim, which is between the border of damascu and
th border of hamath; hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of hauran.

47:17 and the border from the sea shall be hazarenan, the border of
damascus, and the north northward, and the border of hamath. and this
i the north side.

47:18 and the east side ye shall measur from hauran, and from
damascus, and from gilead, and from the land of israel by jordan, from
th border unto the east sea. and thi is the east side.

47:19 and the south side southward, from tamar even to the water of
strif in kadesh, the river to the great sea. and thi is the south
sid southward.

47:20 the west side also shall be the great sea from the border, till
a man come over against hamath. thi is the west side.

47:21 So shall ye divid thi land unto you accord to the tribe of
israel.

47:22 and it shall come to pass, that ye shall divid it by lot for an
inherit unto you, and to the stranger that sojourn among you,
which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as
born in the countri among the children of israel; they shall have
inherit with you among the tribe of israel.

47:23 and it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger
sojourneth, there shall ye give him hi inheritance, saith the lord
god.

48:1 now these are the name of the tribes. from the north end to the
coast of the way of hethlon, as one goeth to hamath, hazarenan, the
bord of damascu northward, to the coast of hamath; for these are
hi side east and west; a portion for dan.

48:2 and by the border of dan, from the east side unto the west side,
a portion for asher.

48:3 and by the border of asher, from the east side even unto the west
side, a portion for naphtali.

48:4 and by the border of naphtali, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for manasseh.

48:5 and by the border of manasseh, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for ephraim.

48:6 and by the border of ephraim, from the east side even unto the
west side, a portion for reuben.

48:7 and by the border of reuben, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for judah.

48:8 and by the border of judah, from the east side unto the west
side, shall be the offer which ye shall offer of five and twenty
thousand reed in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts,
from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuari shall be in
th midst of it.

48:9 the oblat that ye shall offer unto the lord shall be of five
and twenti thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth.

48:10 and for them, even for the priests, shall be thi holi oblation;
toward the north five and twenti thousand in length, and toward the
west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in
breadth, and toward the south five and twenti thousand in length: and
th sanctuari of the lord shall be in the midst thereof.

48:11 It shall be for the priest that are sanctifi of the son of
zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the
children of israel went astray, as the levit went astray.

48:12 and thi oblat of the land that is offer shall be unto them
a thing most holi by the border of the levites.

48:13 and over against the border of the priest the levit shall
hav five and twenti thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth:
al the length shall be five and twenti thousand, and the breadth ten
thousand.

48:14 and they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate
th firstfruit of the land: for it is holi unto the lord.

48:15 and the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against
th five and twenti thousand, shall be a profan place for the city,
for dwelling, and for suburbs: and the citi shall be in the midst
thereof.

48:16 and these shall be the measur thereof; the north side four
thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five
hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the
west side four thousand and five hundred.

48:17 and the suburb of the citi shall be toward the north two
hundr and fifty, and toward the south two hundr and fifty, and
toward the east two hundr and fifty, and toward the west two hundred
and fifty.

48:18 and the residu in length over against the oblat of the holy
port shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and
it shall be over against the oblat of the holi portion; and the
increas thereof shall be for food unto them that serv the city.

48:19 and they that serv the citi shall serv it out of all the
trib of israel.

48:20 all the oblat shall be five and twenti thousand by five and
twenti thousand: ye shall offer the holi oblat foursquare, with the
possess of the city.

48:21 and the residu shall be for the prince, on the one side and on
th other of the holi oblation, and of the possess of the city,
ov against the five and twenti thousand of the oblat toward the
east border, and westward over against the five and twenti thousand
toward the west border, over against the portion for the prince: and
it shall be the holi oblation; and the sanctuari of the hous shall be
in the midst thereof.

48:22 moreov from the possess of the levites, and from the
possess of the city, be in the midst of that which is the
prince's, between the border of judah and the border of benjamin,
shal be for the prince.

48:23 As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west
side, benjamin shall have a portion.

48:24 and by the border of benjamin, from the east side unto the west
side, simeon shall have a portion.

48:25 and by the border of simeon, from the east side unto the west
side, issachar a portion.

48:26 and by the border of issachar, from the east side unto the west
side, zebulun a portion.

48:27 and by the border of zebulun, from the east side unto the west
side, gad a portion.

48:28 and by the border of gad, at the south side southward, the
bord shall be even from tamar unto the water of strife in kadesh,
and to the river toward the great sea.

48:29 thi is the land which ye shall divid by lot unto the tribe of
israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the lord
god.

48:30 and these are the go out of the citi on the north side, four
thousand and five hundr measures.

48:31 and the gate of the citi shall be after the name of the tribes
of israel: three gate northward; one gate of reuben, one gate of
judah, one gate of levi.

48:32 and at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three
gates; and one gate of joseph, one gate of benjamin, one gate of dan.

48:33 and at the south side four thousand and five hundr measures:
and three gates; one gate of simeon, one gate of issachar, one gate of
zebulun.

48:34 At the west side four thousand and five hundred, with their
thre gates; one gate of gad, one gate of asher, one gate of naphtali.

48:35 It wa round about eighteen thousand measures: and the name of
th citi from that day shall be, the lord is there.




th book of daniel


1:1 In the third year of the reign of jehoiakim king of judah came
nebuchadnezzar king of babylon unto jerusalem, and besieg it.

1:2 and the lord gave jehoiakim king of judah into hi hand, with part
of the vessel of the hous of god: which he carri into the land of
shinar to the hous of hi god; and he brought the vessel into the
treasur hous of hi god.

1:3 and the king spake unto ashpenaz the master of hi eunuchs, that
h should bring certain of the children of israel, and of the king's
seed, and of the princes; 1:4 children in whom wa no blemish, but
wel favoured, and skil in all wisdom, and cun in knowledge,
and understand science, and such as had abil in them to stand in
th king' palace, and whom they might teach the learn and the
tongu of the chaldeans.

1:5 and the king appoint them a daili provis of the king' meat,
and of the wine which he drank: so nourish them three years, that
at the end thereof they might stand befor the king.

1:6 now among these were of the children of judah, daniel, hananiah,
mishael, and azariah: 1:7 unto whom the princ of the eunuch gave
names: for he gave unto daniel the name of belteshazzar; and to
hananiah, of shadrach; and to mishael, of meshach; and to azariah, of
abednego.

1:8 but daniel purpos in hi heart that he would not defil himself
with the portion of the king' meat, nor with the wine which he drank:
therefor he request of the princ of the eunuch that he might not
defil himself.

1:9 now god had brought daniel into favour and tender love with the
princ of the eunuchs.

1:10 and the princ of the eunuch said unto daniel, I fear my lord
th king, who hath appoint your meat and your drink: for whi should
h see your face wors like than the children which are of your
sort? then shall ye make me endang my head to the king.

1:11 then said daniel to melzar, whom the princ of the eunuch had
set over daniel, hananiah, mishael, and azariah, 1:12 prove thy
servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us puls to eat,
and water to drink.

1:13 then let our counten be look upon befor thee, and the
counten of the children that eat of the portion of the king's
meat: and as thou seest, deal with thi servants.

1:14 So he consent to them in thi matter, and prove them ten days.

1:15 and at the end of ten day their counten appear fairer and
fatt in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the
king' meat.

1:16 thu melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine
that they should drink; and gave them pulse.

1:17 As for these four children, god gave them knowledg and skill in
al learn and wisdom: and daniel had understand in all visions
and dreams.

1:18 now at the end of the day that the king had said he should bring
them in, then the princ of the eunuch brought them in before
nebuchadnezzar.

1:19 and the king commun with them; and among them all wa found
non like daniel, hananiah, mishael, and azariah: therefor stood they
befor the king.

1:20 and in all matter of wisdom and understanding, that the king
enquir of them, he found them ten time better than all the
magician and astrolog that were in all hi realm.

1:21 and daniel continu even unto the first year of king cyrus.

2:1 and in the second year of the reign of nebuchadnezzar
nebuchadnezzar dream dreams, wherewith hi spirit wa troubled, and
hi sleep brake from him.

2:2 then the king command to call the magicians, and the
astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the chaldeans, for to shew the
k hi dreams. So they came and stood befor the king.

2:3 and the king said unto them, I have dream a dream, and my spirit
wa troubl to know the dream.

2:4 then spake the chaldean to the king in syriack, O king, live for
ever: tell thi servant the dream, and we will shew the
interpretation.

2:5 the king answer and said to the chaldeans, the thing is gone
from me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream, with the
interpret thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses
shal be made a dunghill.

2:6 but if ye shew the dream, and the interpret thereof, ye shall
rec of me gift and reward and great honour: therefor shew me
th dream, and the interpret thereof.

2:7 they answer again and said, let the king tell hi servant the
dream, and we will shew the interpret of it.

2:8 the king answer and said, I know of certainti that ye would gain
th time, becaus ye see the thing is gone from me.

2:9 but if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one
decre for you: for ye have prepar lie and corrupt word to speak
befor me, till the time be changed: therefor tell me the dream, and
i shall know that ye can shew me the interpret thereof.

2:10 the chaldean answer befor the king, and said, there is not a
man upon the earth that can shew the king' matter: therefor there is
no king, lord, nor ruler, that ask such thing at ani magician, or
astrologer, or chaldean.

2:11 and it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none
oth that can shew it befor the king, except the gods, whose
dwel is not with flesh.

2:12 for thi caus the king wa angri and veri furious, and commanded
to destroy all the wise men of babylon.

2:13 and the decre went forth that the wise men should be slain; and
they sought daniel and hi fellow to be slain.

2:14 then daniel answer with counsel and wisdom to arioch the
captain of the king' guard, which wa gone forth to slay the wise men
of babylon: 2:15 He answer and said to arioch the king' captain,
whi is the decre so hasti from the king? then arioch made the thing
known to daniel.

2:16 then daniel went in, and desir of the king that he would give
him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.

2:17 then daniel went to hi house, and made the thing known to
hananiah, mishael, and azariah, hi companions: 2:18 that they would
desir merci of the god of heaven concern thi secret; that
daniel and hi fellow should not perish with the rest of the wise men
of babylon.

2:19 then wa the secret reveal unto daniel in a night vision. then
daniel bless the god of heaven.

2:20 daniel answer and said, bless be the name of god for ever and
ever: for wisdom and might are his: 2:21 and he changeth the time and
th seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom
unto the wise, and knowledg to them that know understanding: 2:22 he
revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the
darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.

2:23 I thank thee, and prais thee, O thou god of my fathers, who hast
given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we
desir of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the king's
matter.

2:24 therefor daniel went in unto arioch, whom the king had ordained
to destroy the wise men of babylon: he went and said thu unto him;
destroy not the wise men of babylon: bring me in befor the king, and
i will shew unto the king the interpretation.

2:25 then arioch brought in daniel befor the king in haste, and said
thu unto him, I have found a man of the captiv of judah, that will
mak known unto the king the interpretation.

2:26 the king answer and said to daniel, whose name was
belteshazzar, art thou abl to make known unto me the dream which i
hav seen, and the interpret thereof?  2:27 daniel answer in
th presenc of the king, and said, the secret which the king hath
demand cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the
soothsayers, shew unto the king; 2:28 but there is a god in heaven
that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king nebuchadnezzar
what shall be in the latter days. thi dream, and the vision of thy
head upon thi bed, are these; 2:29 As for thee, O king, thi thoughts
cam into thi mind upon thi bed, what should come to pass hereafter:
and he that revealeth secret maketh known to thee what shall come to
pass.

2:30 but as for me, thi secret is not reveal to me for ani wisdom
that I have more than ani living, but for their sake that shall make
known the interpret to the king, and that thou mightest know the
thought of thi heart.

2:31 thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. thi great image,
whos bright wa excellent, stood befor thee; and the form
thereof wa terrible.

2:32 thi image' head wa of fine gold, hi breast and hi arm of
silver, hi belli and hi thigh of brass, 2:33 hi leg of iron, his
feet part of iron and part of clay.

2:34 thou sawest till that a stone wa cut out without hands, which
smot the imag upon hi feet that were of iron and clay, and brake
them to pieces.

2:35 then wa the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold,
broken to piec together, and becam like the chaff of the summer
threshingfloors; and the wind carri them away, that no place was
found for them: and the stone that smote the imag becam a great
mountain, and fill the whole earth.

2:36 thi is the dream; and we will tell the interpret thereof
befor the king.

2:37 thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the god of heaven hath
given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

2:38 and wheresoev the children of men dwell, the beast of the
field and the fowl of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and
hath made thee ruler over them all. thou art thi head of gold.

2:39 and after thee shall aris anoth kingdom inferior to thee, and
anoth third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the
earth.

2:40 and the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron
breaketh in piec and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh
al these, shall it break in piec and bruise.

2:41 and wherea thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay,
and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in
it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron
mix with miri clay.

2:42 and as the toe of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay,
so the kingdom shall be partli strong, and partli broken.

2:43 and wherea thou sawest iron mix with miri clay, they shall
mingl themselv with the seed of men: but they shall not cleav one
to another, even as iron is not mix with clay.

2:44 and in the day of these king shall the god of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be
left to other people, but it shall break in piec and consum all
thes kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

2:45 forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone wa cut out of the
mountain without hands, and that it brake in piec the iron, the
brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great god hath made
known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is
certain, and the interpret thereof sure.

2:46 then the king nebuchadnezzar fell upon hi face, and worshipped
daniel, and command that they should offer an oblat and sweet
odour unto him.

2:47 the king answer unto daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that
your god is a god of gods, and a lord of kings, and a reveal of
secrets, see thou couldest reveal thi secret.

2:48 then the king made daniel a great man, and gave him mani great
gifts, and made him ruler over the whole provinc of babylon, and
chief of the governor over all the wise men of babylon.

2:49 then daniel request of the king, and he set shadrach, meshach,
and abednego, over the affair of the provinc of babylon: but daniel
sat in the gate of the king.

3:1 nebuchadnezzar the king made an imag of gold, whose height was
threescor cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in
th plain of dura, in the provinc of babylon.

3:2 then nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather togeth the princes,
th governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the
counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the ruler of the provinces, to
com to the dedic of the imag which nebuchadnezzar the king had
set up.

3:3 then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the
treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the ruler of the
provinces, were gather togeth unto the dedic of the image
that nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood befor the
imag that nebuchadnezzar had set up.

3:4 then an herald cri aloud, To you it is commanded, O people,
nations, and languages, 3:5 that at what time ye hear the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kind of
musick, ye fall down and worship the golden imag that nebuchadnezzar
th king hath set up: 3:6 and whoso falleth not down and worshippeth
shal the same hour be cast into the midst of a burn fieri furnace.

3:7 therefor at that time, when all the peopl heard the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kind of musick, all
th people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped
th golden imag that nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

3:8 wherefor at that time certain chaldean came near, and accused
th jews.

3:9 they spake and said to the king nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for
ever.

3:10 thou, O king, hast made a decree, that everi man that shall hear
th sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer,
and all kind of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:
3:11 and whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be
cast into the midst of a burn fieri furnace.

3:12 there are certain jew whom thou hast set over the affair of the
provinc of babylon, shadrach, meshach, and abednego; these men, o
king, have not regard thee: they serv not thi gods, nor worship the
golden imag which thou hast set up.

3:13 then nebuchadnezzar in hi rage and furi command to bring
shadrach, meshach, and abednego. then they brought these men before
th king.

3:14 nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O shadrach,
meshach, and abednego, do not ye serv my gods, nor worship the golden
imag which I have set up?  3:15 now if ye be readi that at what time
y hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kind of musick, ye fall down and worship the image
which I have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the
sam hour into the midst of a burn fieri furnace; and who is that
god that shall deliv you out of my hands?  3:16 shadrach, meshach,
and abednego, answer and said to the king, O nebuchadnezzar, we are
not care to answer thee in thi matter.

3:17 If it be so, our god whom we serv is abl to deliv us from the
burn fieri furnace, and he will deliv us out of thine hand, o
king.

3:18 but if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve
thi gods, nor worship the golden imag which thou hast set up.

3:19 then wa nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of hi visage
wa chang against shadrach, meshach, and abednego: therefor he
spake, and command that they should heat the furnac one seven times
mor than it wa wont to be heated.

3:20 and he command the most mighti men that were in hi armi to
bind shadrach, meshach, and abednego, and to cast them into the
burn fieri furnace.

3:21 then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their
hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the
burn fieri furnace.

3:22 therefor becaus the king' command wa urgent, and the
furnac exceed hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took
up shadrach, meshach, and abednego.

3:23 and these three men, shadrach, meshach, and abednego, fell down
bound into the midst of the burn fieri furnace.

3:24 then nebuchadnezzar the king wa astonied, and rose up in haste,
and spake, and said unto hi counsellors, did not we cast three men
bound into the midst of the fire? they answer and said unto the
king, true, O king.

3:25 He answer and said, lo, I see four men loose, walk in the
midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth
i like the son of god.

3:26 then nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burn fiery
furnace, and spake, and said, shadrach, meshach, and abednego, ye
serv of the most high god, come forth, and come hither. then
shadrach, meshach, and abednego, came forth of the midst of the fire.

3:27 and the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's
counsellors, be gather together, saw these men, upon whose bodies
th fire had no power, nor wa an hair of their head singed, neither
wer their coat changed, nor the smell of fire had pass on them.

3:28 then nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, bless be the god of
shadrach, meshach, and abednego, who hath sent hi angel, and
deliv hi servant that trust in him, and have chang the
king' word, and yield their bodies, that they might not serv nor
worship ani god, except their own god.

3:29 therefor I make a decree, that everi people, nation, and
language, which speak ani thing amiss against the god of shadrach,
meshach, and abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their hous shall
b made a dunghill: becaus there is no other god that can deliver
aft thi sort.

3:30 then the king promot shadrach, meshach, and abednego, in the
provinc of babylon.

4:1 nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages,
that dwell in all the earth; peac be multipli unto you.

4:2 I thought it good to shew the sign and wonder that the high god
hath wrought toward me.

4:3 how great are hi signs! and how mighti are hi wonders! his
kingdom is an everlast kingdom, and hi dominion is from generation
to generation.

4:4 I nebuchadnezzar wa at rest in mine house, and flourish in my
palace: 4:5 I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thought upon
mi bed and the vision of my head troubl me.

4:6 therefor made I a decre to bring in all the wise men of babylon
befor me, that they might make known unto me the interpret of
th dream.

4:7 then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the chaldeans, and
th soothsayers: and I told the dream befor them; but they did not
mak known unto me the interpret thereof.

4:8 but at the last daniel came in befor me, whose name was
belteshazzar, accord to the name of my god, and in whom is the
spirit of the holi gods: and befor him I told the dream, saying, 4:9
o belteshazzar, master of the magicians, becaus I know that the
spirit of the holi god is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell
m the vision of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation
thereof.

4:10 thu were the vision of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold a
tre in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof wa great.

4:11 the tree grew, and wa strong, and the height thereof reached
unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth: 4:12
the leav thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it
wa meat for all: the beast of the field had shadow under it, and the
fowl of the heaven dwelt in the bough thereof, and all flesh wa fed
of it.

4:13 I saw in the vision of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a
watch and an holi one came down from heaven; 4:14 He cri aloud,
and said thus, hew down the tree, and cut off hi branches, shake off
hi leaves, and scatter hi fruit: let the beast get away from under
it, and the fowl from hi branches: 4:15 nevertheless leav the stump
of hi root in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the
tend grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven,
and let hi portion be with the beast in the grass of the earth: 4:16
let hi heart be chang from man's, and let a beast' heart be given
unto him; and let seven time pass over him.

4:17 thi matter is by the decre of the watchers, and the demand by
th word of the holi ones: to the intent that the live may know that
th most high ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoev he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.

4:18 thi dream I king nebuchadnezzar have seen. now thou, o
belteshazzar, declar the interpret thereof, forasmuch as all the
wis men of my kingdom are not abl to make known unto me the
interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holi god is
in thee.

4:19 then daniel, whose name wa belteshazzar, wa astoni for one
hour, and hi thought troubl him. the king spake, and said,
belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpret thereof,
troubl thee. belteshazzar answer and said, My lord, the dream be to
them that hate thee, and the interpret thereof to thine enemies.

4:20 the tree that thou sawest, which grew, and wa strong, whose
height reach unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the
earth; 4:21 whose leav were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in
it wa meat for all; under which the beast of the field dwelt, and
upon whose branch the fowl of the heaven had their habitation: 4:22
it is thou, O king, that art grown and becom strong: for thy
great is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thi dominion to the
end of the earth.

4:23 and wherea the king saw a watcher and an holi one come down
from heaven, and saying, hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave
th stump of the root thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron
and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with
th dew of heaven, and let hi portion be with the beast of the
field, till seven time pass over him; 4:24 thi is the
interpretation, O king, and thi is the decre of the most high, which
i come upon my lord the king: 4:25 that they shall drive thee from
men, and thi dwell shall be with the beast of the field, and they
shal make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the
dew of heaven, and seven time shall pass over thee, till thou know
that the most high ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to
whomsoev he will.

4:26 and wherea they command to leav the stump of the tree roots;
thi kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known
that the heaven do rule.

4:27 wherefore, O king, let my counsel be accept unto thee, and
break off thi sin by righteousness, and thine iniqu by shewing
merci to the poor; if it may be a lengthen of thi tranquillity.

4:28 all thi came upon the king nebuchadnezzar.

4:29 At the end of twelv month he walk in the palac of the
kingdom of babylon.

4:30 the king spake, and said, Is not thi great babylon, that I have
built for the hous of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for
th honour of my majesty?  4:31 while the word wa in the king's
mouth, there fell a voic from heaven, saying, O king nebuchadnezzar,
to thee it is spoken; the kingdom is depart from thee.

4:32 and they shall drive thee from men, and thi dwell shall be
with the beast of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as
oxen, and seven time shall pass over thee, until thou know that the
most high ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoev he
will.

4:33 the same hour wa the thing fulfil upon nebuchadnezzar: and he
wa driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and hi bodi wa wet
with the dew of heaven, till hi hair were grown like eagles'
feathers, and hi nail like birds' claws.

4:34 and at the end of the day I nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes
unto heaven, and mine understand return unto me, and I blessed
th most high, and I prais and honour him that liveth for ever,
whos dominion is an everlast dominion, and hi kingdom is from
gener to generation: 4:35 and all the inhabit of the earth
ar reput as nothing: and he doeth accord to hi will in the army
of heaven, and among the inhabit of the earth: and none can stay
hi hand, or say unto him, what doest thou?  4:36 At the same time my
reason return unto me; and for the glori of my kingdom, mine honour
and bright return unto me; and my counsellor and my lords
sought unto me; and I wa establish in my kingdom, and excellent
majesti wa ad unto me.

4:37 now I nebuchadnezzar prais and extol and honour the king of
heaven, all whose work are truth, and hi way judgment: and those
that walk in pride he is abl to abase.

5:1 belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of hi lords,
and drank wine befor the thousand.

5:2 belshazzar, while he tast the wine, command to bring the
golden and silver vessel which hi father nebuchadnezzar had taken
out of the templ which wa in jerusalem; that the king, and his
princes, hi wives, and hi concubines, might drink therein.

5:3 then they brought the golden vessel that were taken out of the
templ of the hous of god which wa at jerusalem; and the king, and
hi princes, hi wives, and hi concubines, drank in them.

5:4 they drank wine, and prais the god of gold, and of silver, of
brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

5:5 In the same hour came forth finger of a man' hand, and wrote
ov against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the
king' palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.

5:6 then the king' counten wa changed, and hi thought troubled
him, so that the joint of hi loin were loosed, and hi knee smote
on against another.

5:7 the king cri aloud to bring in the astrologers, the chaldeans,
and the soothsayers. and the king spake, and said to the wise men of
babylon, whosoev shall read thi writing, and shew me the
interpret thereof, shall be cloth with scarlet, and have a
chain of gold about hi neck, and shall be the third ruler in the
kingdom.

5:8 then came in all the king' wise men: but they could not read the
writing, nor make known to the king the interpret thereof.

5:9 then wa king belshazzar greatli troubled, and hi counten was
chang in him, and hi lord were astonied.

5:10 now the queen by reason of the word of the king and hi lords
cam into the banquet house: and the queen spake and said, O king,
liv for ever: let not thi thought troubl thee, nor let thy
counten be changed: 5:11 there is a man in thi kingdom, in whom is
th spirit of the holi gods; and in the day of thi father light and
understand and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, wa found in
him; whom the king nebuchadnezzar thi father, the king, I say, thy
father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, chaldeans, and
soothsayers; 5:12 forasmuch as an excel spirit, and knowledge, and
understanding, interpret of dreams, and shew of hard sentences,
and dissolv of doubts, were found in the same daniel, whom the king
nam belteshazzar: now let daniel be called, and he will shew the
interpretation.

5:13 then wa daniel brought in befor the king. and the king spake
and said unto daniel, art thou that daniel, which art of the children
of the captiv of judah, whom the king my father brought out of
jewry?  5:14 I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the god is
in thee, and that light and understand and excel wisdom is
found in thee.

5:15 and now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought in
befor me, that they should read thi writing, and make known unto me
th interpret thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation
of the thing: 5:16 and I have heard of thee, that thou canst make
interpretations, and dissolv doubts: now if thou canst read the
writing, and make known to me the interpret thereof, thou shalt
b cloth with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thi neck, and
shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.

5:17 then daniel answer and said befor the king, let thi gift be
to thyself, and give thi reward to another; yet I will read the
writ unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.

5:18 O thou king, the most high god gave nebuchadnezzar thi father a
kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour: 5:19 and for the majesty
that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages, trembl and
fear befor him: whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept
alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he would he put down.

5:20 but when hi heart wa lift up, and hi mind harden in pride,
h wa depos from hi kingli throne, and they took hi glori from
him: 5:21 and he wa driven from the son of men; and hi heart was
mad like the beasts, and hi dwell wa with the wild asses: they
f him with grass like oxen, and hi bodi wa wet with the dew of
heaven; till he knew that the most high god rule in the kingdom of
men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoev he will.

5:22 and thou hi son, O belshazzar, hast not humbl thine heart,
though thou knewest all this; 5:23 but hast lift up thyself against
th lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessel of hi house
befor thee, and thou, and thi lords, thi wives, and thi concubines,
hav drunk wine in them; and thou hast prais the god of silver, and
gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor
know: and the god in whose hand thi breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, hast thou not glorified: 5:24 then wa the part of the hand sent
from him; and thi write wa written.

5:25 and thi is the write that wa written, mene, mene, tekel,
upharsin.

5:26 thi is the interpret of the thing: mene; god hath numbered
thi kingdom, and finish it.

5:27 tekel; thou art weigh in the balances, and art found wanting.

5:28 peres; thi kingdom is divided, and given to the mede and
persians.

5:29 then command belshazzar, and they cloth daniel with scarlet,
and put a chain of gold about hi neck, and made a proclamation
concern him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

5:30 In that night wa belshazzar the king of the chaldean slain.

5:31 and dariu the median took the kingdom, be about threescore
and two year old.

6:1 It pleas dariu to set over the kingdom an hundr and twenty
princes, which should be over the whole kingdom; 6:2 and over these
thre presidents; of whom daniel wa first: that the princ might
giv account unto them, and the king should have no damage.

6:3 then thi daniel wa prefer abov the presid and princes,
becaus an excel spirit wa in him; and the king thought to set
him over the whole realm.

6:4 then the presid and princ sought to find occas against
daniel concern the kingdom; but they could find none occas nor
fault; forasmuch as he wa faithful, neither wa there ani error or
fault found in him.

6:5 then said these men, We shall not find ani occas against this
daniel, except we find it against him concern the law of hi god.

6:6 then these presid and princ assembl togeth to the king,
and said thu unto him, king darius, live for ever.

6:7 all the presid of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes,
th counsellors, and the captains, have consult togeth to
establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whosoever
shal ask a petit of ani god or man for thirti days, save of thee,
o king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.

6:8 now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that it
b not changed, accord to the law of the mede and persians, which
altereth not.

6:9 wherefor king dariu sign the write and the decree.

6:10 now when daniel knew that the write wa signed, he went into
hi house; and hi window be open in hi chamber toward jerusalem,
h kneel upon hi knee three time a day, and prayed, and gave
thank befor hi god, as he did aforetime.

6:11 then these men assembled, and found daniel pray and making
suppl befor hi god.

6:12 then they came near, and spake befor the king concern the
king' decree; hast thou not sign a decree, that everi man that
shal ask a petit of ani god or man within thirti days, save of
thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? the king answered
and said, the thing is true, accord to the law of the mede and
persians, which altereth not.

6:13 then answer they and said befor the king, that daniel, which
i of the children of the captiv of judah, regardeth not thee, o
king, nor the decre that thou hast signed, but maketh hi petition
thre time a day.

6:14 then the king, when he heard these words, wa sore displeased
with himself, and set hi heart on daniel to deliv him: and he
labour till the go down of the sun to deliv him.

6:15 then these men assembl unto the king, and said unto the king,
know, O king, that the law of the mede and persian is, that no
decre nor statut which the king establisheth may be changed.

6:16 then the king commanded, and they brought daniel, and cast him
into the den of lions. now the king spake and said unto daniel, thy
god whom thou servest continually, he will deliv thee.

6:17 and a stone wa brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and
th king seal it with hi own signet, and with the signet of his
lords; that the purpos might not be chang concern daniel.

6:18 then the king went to hi palace, and pass the night fasting:
neith were instrument of musick brought befor him: and hi sleep
went from him.

6:19 then the king aros veri earli in the morning, and went in haste
unto the den of lions.

6:20 and when he came to the den, he cri with a lament voice
unto daniel: and the king spake and said to daniel, O daniel, servant
of the live god, is thi god, whom thou servest continually, abl to
deliv thee from the lions?  6:21 then said daniel unto the king, o
king, live for ever.

6:22 My god hath sent hi angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that
they have not hurt me: forasmuch as befor him innoc wa found in
me; and also befor thee, O king, have I done no hurt.

6:23 then wa the king exceedingli glad for him, and command that
they should take daniel up out of the den. So daniel wa taken up out
of the den, and no manner of hurt wa found upon him, becaus he
believ in hi god.

6:24 and the king commanded, and they brought those men which had
accus daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their
children, and their wives; and the lion had the masteri of them, and
brak all their bone in piec or ever they came at the bottom of the
den.

6:25 then king dariu wrote unto all people, nations, and languages,
that dwell in all the earth; peac be multipli unto you.

6:26 I make a decree, that in everi dominion of my kingdom men tremble
and fear befor the god of daniel: for he is the live god, and
stedfast for ever, and hi kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,
and hi dominion shall be even unto the end.

6:27 He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh sign and wonder in
heaven and in earth, who hath deliv daniel from the power of the
lions.

6:28 So thi daniel prosper in the reign of darius, and in the reign
of cyru the persian.

7:1 In the first year of belshazzar king of babylon daniel had a dream
and vision of hi head upon hi bed: then he wrote the dream, and
told the sum of the matters.

7:2 daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold,
th four wind of the heaven strove upon the great sea.

7:3 and four great beast came up from the sea, divers one from
another.

7:4 the first wa like a lion, and had eagle' wings: I beheld till
th wing thereof were plucked, and it wa lift up from the earth,
and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man' heart wa given to
it.

7:5 and behold anoth beast, a second, like to a bear, and it raised
up itself on one side, and it had three rib in the mouth of it
between the teeth of it: and they said thu unto it, arise, devour
much flesh.

7:6 after thi I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, which had
upon the back of it four wing of a fowl; the beast had also four
heads; and dominion wa given to it.

7:7 after thi I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast,
dread and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron
teeth: it devour and brake in pieces, and stamp the residu with
th feet of it: and it wa divers from all the beast that were
befor it; and it had ten horns.

7:8 I consid the horns, and, behold, there came up among them
anoth littl horn, befor whom there were three of the first horns
pluck up by the roots: and, behold, in thi horn were eye like the
ey of man, and a mouth speak great things.

7:9 I beheld till the throne were cast down, and the ancient of days
did sit, whose garment wa white as snow, and the hair of hi head
lik the pure wool: hi throne wa like the fieri flame, and his
wheel as burn fire.

7:10 A fieri stream issu and came forth from befor him: thousand
thousand minist unto him, and ten thousand time ten thousand
stood befor him: the judgment wa set, and the book were opened.

7:11 I beheld then becaus of the voic of the great word which the
horn spake: I beheld even till the beast wa slain, and hi body
destroyed, and given to the burn flame.

7:12 As concern the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion
taken away: yet their live were prolong for a season and time.

7:13 I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the son of man
cam with the cloud of heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and
they brought him near befor him.

7:14 and there wa given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that
al people, nations, and languages, should serv him: hi dominion is
an everlast dominion, which shall not pass away, and hi kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed.

7:15 I daniel wa griev in my spirit in the midst of my body, and
th vision of my head troubl me.

7:16 I came near unto one of them that stood by, and ask him the
truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation
of the things.

7:17 these great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall
aris out of the earth.

7:18 but the saint of the most high shall take the kingdom, and
possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.

7:19 then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was
divers from all the others, exceed dreadful, whose teeth were of
iron, and hi nail of brass; which devoured, brake in pieces, and
stamp the residu with hi feet; 7:20 and of the ten horn that were
in hi head, and of the other which came up, and befor whom three
fell; even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very
great things, whose look wa more stout than hi fellows.

7:21 I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and
prevail against them; 7:22 until the ancient of day came, and
judg wa given to the saint of the most high; and the time came
that the saint possess the kingdom.

7:23 thu he said, the fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon
earth, which shall be divers from all kingdoms, and shall devour the
whol earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.

7:24 and the ten horn out of thi kingdom are ten king that shall
arise: and anoth shall rise after them; and he shall be divers from
th first, and he shall subdu three kings.

7:25 and he shall speak great word against the most high, and shall
wear out the saint of the most high, and think to chang time and
laws: and they shall be given into hi hand until a time and time and
th divid of time.

7:26 but the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
dominion, to consum and to destroy it unto the end.

7:27 and the kingdom and dominion, and the great of the kingdom
und the whole heaven, shall be given to the peopl of the saint of
th most high, whose kingdom is an everlast kingdom, and all
dominion shall serv and obey him.

7:28 hitherto is the end of the matter. As for me daniel, my
cogit much troubl me, and my counten chang in me: but i
kept the matter in my heart.

8:1 In the third year of the reign of king belshazzar a vision
appear unto me, even unto me daniel, after that which appear unto
m at the first.

8:2 and I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw, that I was
at shushan in the palace, which is in the provinc of elam; and I saw
in a vision, and I wa by the river of ulai.

8:3 then I lift up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood
befor the river a ram which had two horns: and the two horn were
high; but one wa higher than the other, and the higher came up last.

8:4 I saw the ram push westward, and northward, and southward; so
that no beast might stand befor him, neither wa there ani that
could deliv out of hi hand; but he did accord to hi will, and
becam great.

8:5 and as I wa considering, behold, an he goat came from the west on
th face of the whole earth, and touch not the ground: and the goat
had a notabl horn between hi eyes.

8:6 and he came to the ram that had two horns, which I had seen
stand befor the river, and ran unto him in the furi of hi power.

8:7 and I saw him come close unto the ram, and he wa move with
chol against him, and smote the ram, and brake hi two horns: and
ther wa no power in the ram to stand befor him, but he cast him
down to the ground, and stamp upon him: and there wa none that
could deliv the ram out of hi hand.

8:8 therefor the he goat wax veri great: and when he wa strong,
th great horn wa broken; and for it came up four notabl one toward
th four wind of heaven.

8:9 and out of one of them came forth a littl horn, which waxed
exceed great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the
pleas land.

8:10 and it wax great, even to the host of heaven; and it cast down
som of the host and of the star to the ground, and stamp upon
them.

8:11 yea, he magnifi himself even to the princ of the host, and by
him the daili sacrific wa taken away, and the place of the sanctuary
wa cast down.

8:12 and an host wa given him against the daili sacrific by reason
of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it
practised, and prospered.

8:13 then I heard one saint speaking, and anoth saint said unto that
certain saint which spake, how long shall be the vision concern the
daili sacrifice, and the transgress of desolation, to give both the
sanctuari and the host to be trodden under foot?  8:14 and he said
unto me, unto two thousand and three hundr days; then shall the
sanctuari be cleansed.

8:15 and it came to pass, when I, even I daniel, had seen the vision,
and sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stood befor me as the
appear of a man.

8:16 and I heard a man' voic between the bank of ulai, which
called, and said, gabriel, make thi man to understand the vision.

8:17 So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I wa afraid,
and fell upon my face: but he said unto me, understand, O son of man:
for at the time of the end shall be the vision.

8:18 now as he wa speak with me, I wa in a deep sleep on my face
toward the ground: but he touch me, and set me upright.

8:19 and he said, behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the
last end of the indignation: for at the time appoint the end shall
be.

8:20 the ram which thou sawest have two horn are the king of media
and persia.

8:21 and the rough goat is the king of grecia: and the great horn that
i between hi eye is the first king.

8:22 now that be broken, wherea four stood up for it, four
kingdom shall stand up out of the nation, but not in hi power.

8:23 and in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors
ar come to the full, a king of fierc countenance, and understanding
dark sentences, shall stand up.

8:24 and hi power shall be mighty, but not by hi own power: and he
shal destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall
destroy the mighti and the holi people.

8:25 and through hi polici also he shall caus craft to prosper in
hi hand; and he shall magnifi himself in hi heart, and by peace
shal destroy many: he shall also stand up against the princ of
princes; but he shall be broken without hand.

8:26 and the vision of the even and the morn which wa told is
true: wherefor shut thou up the vision; for it shall be for many
days.

8:27 and I daniel fainted, and wa sick certain days; afterward I rose
up, and did the king' business; and I wa astonish at the vision,
but none understood it.

9:1 In the first year of dariu the son of ahasuerus, of the seed of
th medes, which wa made king over the realm of the chaldeans; 9:2 in
th first year of hi reign I daniel understood by book the number of
th years, whereof the word of the lord came to jeremiah the prophet,
that he would accomplish seventi year in the desol of
jerusalem.

9:3 and I set my face unto the lord god, to seek by prayer and
supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes: 9:4 and i
pray unto the lord my god, and made my confession, and said, O lord,
th great and dread god, keep the coven and merci to them
that love him, and to them that keep hi commandments; 9:5 We have
sinned, and have commit iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even by depart from thi precept and from thi judgments:
9:6 neither have we hearken unto thi servant the prophets, which
spak in thi name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to
al the peopl of the land.

9:7 O lord, righteous belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion
of faces, as at thi day; to the men of judah, and to the inhabitants
of jerusalem, and unto all israel, that are near, and that are far
off, through all the countri whither thou hast driven them, because
of their trespass that they have trespass against thee.

9:8 O lord, to us belongeth confus of face, to our kings, to our
princes, and to our fathers, becaus we have sin against thee.

9:9 To the lord our god belong merci and forgivenesses, though we
hav rebel against him; 9:10 neither have we obey the voic of
th lord our god, to walk in hi laws, which he set befor us by his
serv the prophets.

9:11 yea, all israel have transgress thi law, even by departing,
that they might not obey thi voice; therefor the curs is pour upon
us, and the oath that is written in the law of mose the servant of
god, becaus we have sin against him.

9:12 and he hath confirm hi words, which he spake against us, and
against our judg that judg us, by bring upon us a great evil:
for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been done upon
jerusalem.

9:13 As it is written in the law of moses, all thi evil is come upon
us: yet made we not our prayer befor the lord our god, that we might
turn from our iniquities, and understand thi truth.

9:14 therefor hath the lord watch upon the evil, and brought it
upon us: for the lord our god is righteou in all hi work which he
doeth: for we obey not hi voice.

9:15 and now, O lord our god, that hast brought thi peopl forth out
of the land of egypt with a mighti hand, and hast gotten thee renown,
a at thi day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.

9:16 O lord, accord to all thi righteousness, I beseech thee, let
thin anger and thi furi be turn away from thi citi jerusalem, thy
holi mountain: becaus for our sins, and for the iniqu of our
fathers, jerusalem and thi peopl are becom a reproach to all that
ar about us.

9:17 now therefore, O our god, hear the prayer of thi servant, and his
supplications, and caus thi face to shine upon thi sanctuari that is
desolate, for the lord' sake.

9:18 O my god, inclin thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and
behold our desolations, and the citi which is call by thi name: for
w do not present our supplic befor thee for our
righteousnesses, but for thi great mercies.

9:19 O lord, hear; O lord, forgive; O lord, hearken and do; defer not,
for thine own sake, O my god: for thi citi and thi peopl are called
bi thi name.

9:20 and while I wa speaking, and praying, and confess my sin and
th sin of my peopl israel, and present my supplic befor the
lord my god for the holi mountain of my god; 9:21 yea, while I was
speak in prayer, even the man gabriel, whom I had seen in the
vis at the beginning, be caus to fli swiftly, touch me about
th time of the even oblation.

9:22 and he inform me, and talk with me, and said, O daniel, I am
now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.

9:23 At the begin of thi supplic the command came forth,
and I am come to shew thee; for thou art greatli beloved: therefore
understand the matter, and consid the vision.

9:24 seventi week are determin upon thi peopl and upon thi holy
city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to
mak reconcili for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint
th most holy.

9:25 know therefor and understand, that from the go forth of the
command to restor and to build jerusalem unto the messiah the
princ shall be seven weeks, and threescor and two weeks: the street
shal be built again, and the wall, even in troublou times.

9:26 and after threescor and two week shall messiah be cut off, but
not for himself: and the peopl of the princ that shall come shall
destroy the citi and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with
a flood, and unto the end of the war desol are determined.

9:27 and he shall confirm the coven with mani for one week: and in
th midst of the week he shall caus the sacrific and the oblat to
cease, and for the overspread of abomin he shall make it
desolate, even until the consummation, and that determin shall be
pour upon the desolate.

10:1 In the third year of cyru king of persia a thing wa revealed
unto daniel, whose name wa call belteshazzar; and the thing was
true, but the time appoint wa long: and he understood the thing,
and had understand of the vision.

10:2 In those day I daniel wa mourn three full weeks.

10:3 I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth,
neith did I anoint myself at all, till three whole week were
fulfilled.

10:4 and in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I wa by
th side of the great river, which is hiddekel; 10:5 then I lift up
min eyes, and looked, and behold a certain man cloth in linen,
whos loin were gird with fine gold of uphaz: 10:6 hi bodi also
wa like the beryl, and hi face as the appear of lightning, and
hi eye as lamp of fire, and hi arm and hi feet like in colour to
polish brass, and the voic of hi word like the voic of a
multitude.

10:7 and I daniel alon saw the vision: for the men that were with me
saw not the vision; but a great quak fell upon them, so that they
fl to hide themselves.

10:8 therefor I wa left alone, and saw thi great vision, and there
remain no strength in me: for my comeli wa turn in me into
corruption, and I retain no strength.

10:9 yet heard I the voic of hi words: and when I heard the voic of
hi words, then wa I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward
th ground.

10:10 and, behold, an hand touch me, which set me upon my knee and
upon the palm of my hands.

10:11 and he said unto me, O daniel, a man greatli beloved, understand
th word that I speak unto thee, and stand upright: for unto thee am
i now sent.

and when he had spoken thi word unto me, I stood trembling.

10:12 then said he unto me, fear not, daniel: for from the first day
that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thyself
befor thi god, thi word were heard, and I am come for thi words.

10:13 but the princ of the kingdom of persia withstood me one and
twenti days: but, lo, michael, one of the chief princes, came to help
me; and I remain there with the king of persia.

10:14 now I am come to make thee understand what shall befal thy
peopl in the latter days: for yet the vision is for mani days.

10:15 and when he had spoken such word unto me, I set my face toward
th ground, and I becam dumb.

10:16 and, behold, one like the similitud of the son of men touched
mi lips: then I open my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that
stood befor me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrow are turn upon
me, and I have retain no strength.

10:17 for how can the servant of thi my lord talk with thi my lord?
for as for me, straightway there remain no strength in me, neither
i there breath left in me.

10:18 then there came again and touch me one like the appear of
a man, and he strengthen me, 10:19 and said, O man greatli beloved,
fear not: peac be unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong. and when he
had spoken unto me, I wa strengthened, and said, let my lord speak;
for thou hast strengthen me.

10:20 then said he, knowest thou wherefor I come unto thee? and now
wil I return to fight with the princ of persia: and when I am gone
forth, lo, the princ of grecia shall come.

10:21 but I will shew thee that which is note in the scriptur of
truth: and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but
michael your prince.

11:1 also I in the first year of dariu the mede, even I, stood to
confirm and to strengthen him.

11:2 and now will I shew thee the truth. behold, there shall stand up
yet three king in persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than
they all: and by hi strength through hi rich he shall stir up all
against the realm of grecia.

11:3 and a mighti king shall stand up, that shall rule with great
dominion, and do accord to hi will.

11:4 and when he shall stand up, hi kingdom shall be broken, and
shal be divid toward the four wind of heaven; and not to his
posterity, nor accord to hi dominion which he ruled: for his
kingdom shall be pluck up, even for other besid those.

11:5 and the king of the south shall be strong, and one of his
princes; and he shall be strong abov him, and have dominion; his
dominion shall be a great dominion.

11:6 and in the end of year they shall join themselv together; for
th king' daughter of the south shall come to the king of the north
to make an agreement: but she shall not retain the power of the arm;
neith shall he stand, nor hi arm: but she shall be given up, and
they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that strengthened
h in these times.

11:7 but out of a branch of her root shall one stand up in his
estate, which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the
fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them, and
shal prevail: 11:8 and shall also carri captiv into egypt their
gods, with their princes, and with their preciou vessel of silver
and of gold; and he shall continu more year than the king of the
north.

11:9 So the king of the south shall come into hi kingdom, and shall
return into hi own land.

11:10 but hi son shall be stir up, and shall assembl a multitude
of great forces: and one shall certainli come, and overflow, and pass
through: then shall he return, and be stir up, even to his
fortress.

11:11 and the king of the south shall be move with choler, and shall
com forth and fight with him, even with the king of the north: and he
shal set forth a great multitude; but the multitud shall be given
into hi hand.

11:12 and when he hath taken away the multitude, hi heart shall be
lift up; and he shall cast down mani ten thousands: but he shall not
b strengthen by it.

11:13 for the king of the north shall return, and shall set forth a
multitud greater than the former, and shall certainli come after
certain year with a great armi and with much riches.

11:14 and in those time there shall mani stand up against the king of
th south: also the robber of thi peopl shall exalt themselv to
establish the vision; but they shall fall.

11:15 So the king of the north shall come, and cast up a mount, and
tak the most fenc cities: and the arm of the south shall not
withstand, neither hi chosen people, neither shall there be any
strength to withstand.

11:16 but he that cometh against him shall do accord to hi own
will, and none shall stand befor him: and he shall stand in the
glori land, which by hi hand shall be consumed.

11:17 He shall also set hi face to enter with the strength of his
whol kingdom, and upright one with him; thu shall he do: and he
shal give him the daughter of women, corrupt her: but she shall
not stand on hi side, neither be for him.

11:18 after thi shall he turn hi face unto the isles, and shall take
many: but a princ for hi own behalf shall caus the reproach offered
bi him to cease; without hi own reproach he shall caus it to turn
upon him.

11:19 then he shall turn hi face toward the fort of hi own land: but
h shall stumbl and fall, and not be found.

11:20 then shall stand up in hi estat a raiser of tax in the glory
of the kingdom: but within few day he shall be destroyed, neither in
anger, nor in battle.

11:21 and in hi estat shall stand up a vile person, to whom they
shal not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall come in
peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.

11:22 and with the arm of a flood shall they be overflown from before
him, and shall be broken; yea, also the princ of the covenant.

11:23 and after the leagu made with him he shall work deceitfully:
for he shall come up, and shall becom strong with a small people.

11:24 He shall enter peaceabl even upon the fattest place of the
province; and he shall do that which hi father have not done, nor
hi fathers' fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey, and spoil,
and riches: yea, and he shall forecast hi devic against the strong
holds, even for a time.

11:25 and he shall stir up hi power and hi courag against the king
of the south with a great army; and the king of the south shall be
stir up to battl with a veri great and mighti army; but he shall
not stand: for they shall forecast devic against him.

11:26 yea, they that feed of the portion of hi meat shall destroy
him, and hi armi shall overflow: and mani shall fall down slain.

11:27 and both of these kings' heart shall be to do mischief, and
they shall speak lie at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet
th end shall be at the time appointed.

11:28 then shall he return into hi land with great riches; and his
heart shall be against the holi covenant; and he shall do exploits,
and return to hi own land.

11:29 At the time appoint he shall return, and come toward the
south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.

11:30 for the ship of chittim shall come against him: therefor he
shal be grieved, and return, and have indign against the holy
covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence
with them that forsak the holi covenant.

11:31 and arm shall stand on hi part, and they shall pollut the
sanctuari of strength, and shall take away the daili sacrifice, and
they shall place the abomin that maketh desolate.

11:32 and such as do wickedli against the coven shall he corrupt by
flatteries: but the peopl that do know their god shall be strong, and
do exploits.

11:33 and they that understand among the peopl shall instruct many:
yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by
spoil, mani days.

11:34 now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little
help: but mani shall cleav to them with flatteries.

11:35 and some of them of understand shall fall, to tri them, and
to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end: because
it is yet for a time appointed.

11:36 and the king shall do accord to hi will; and he shall exalt
himself, and magnifi himself abov everi god, and shall speak
marvel thing against the god of gods, and shall prosper till the
indign be accomplished: for that that is determin shall be
done.

11:37 neither shall he regard the god of hi fathers, nor the desire
of women, nor regard ani god: for he shall magnifi himself abov all.

11:38 but in hi estat shall he honour the god of forces: and a god
whom hi father knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and
with preciou stones, and pleasant things.

11:39 thu shall he do in the most strong hold with a strang god,
whom he shall acknowledg and increas with glory: and he shall cause
them to rule over many, and shall divid the land for gain.

11:40 and at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at
him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with mani ships; and
h shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.

11:41 He shall enter also into the gloriou land, and mani countries
shal be overthrown: but these shall escap out of hi hand, even
edom, and moab, and the chief of the children of ammon.

11:42 He shall stretch forth hi hand also upon the countries: and the
land of egypt shall not escape.

11:43 but he shall have power over the treasur of gold and of
silver, and over all the preciou thing of egypt: and the libyan and
th ethiopian shall be at hi steps.

11:44 but tide out of the east and out of the north shall trouble
him: therefor he shall go forth with great furi to destroy, and
utterli to make away many.

11:45 and he shall plant the tabernacl of hi palac between the
sea in the gloriou holi mountain; yet he shall come to hi end, and
non shall help him.

12:1 and at that time shall michael stand up, the great princ which
standeth for the children of thi people: and there shall be a time of
trouble, such as never wa sinc there wa a nation even to that same
time: and at that time thi peopl shall be delivered, everi one that
shal be found written in the book.

12:2 and mani of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
som to everlast life, and some to shame and everlast contempt.

12:3 and they that be wise shall shine as the bright of the
firmament; and they that turn mani to righteous as the star for
ev and ever.

12:4 but thou, O daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to
th time of the end: mani shall run to and fro, and knowledg shall be
increased.

12:5 then I daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the one
on thi side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of
th bank of the river.

12:6 and one said to the man cloth in linen, which wa upon the
wat of the river, how long shall it be to the end of these wonders?
12:7 and I heard the man cloth in linen, which wa upon the waters
of the river, when he held up hi right hand and hi left hand unto
heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shall be for a
time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplish to
scatt the power of the holi people, all these thing shall be
finished.

12:8 and I heard, but I understood not: then said I, O my lord, what
shal be the end of these things?  12:9 and he said, Go thi way,
daniel: for the word are close up and seal till the time of the
end.

12:10 mani shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the
wick shall do wickedly: and none of the wick shall understand; but
th wise shall understand.

12:11 and from the time that the daili sacrific shall be taken away,
and the abomin that maketh desol set up, there shall be a
thousand two hundr and nineti days.

12:12 bless is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three
hundr and five and thirti days.

12:13 but go thou thi way till the end be: for thou shalt rest,
and stand in thi lot at the end of the days.




hosea


1:1 the word of the lord that came unto hosea, the son of beeri, in
th day of uzziah, jotham, ahaz, and hezekiah, king of judah, and in
th day of jeroboam the son of joash, king of israel.

1:2 the begin of the word of the lord by hosea. and the lord said
to hosea, go, take unto thee a wife of whoredom and children of
whoredoms: for the land hath commit great whoredom, depart from
th lord.

1:3 So he went and took gomer the daughter of diblaim; which
conceived, and bare him a son.

1:4 and the lord said unto him, call hi name jezreel; for yet a
littl while, and I will aveng the blood of jezreel upon the hous of
jehu, and will caus to ceas the kingdom of the hous of israel.

1:5 and it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow
of israel, in the valley of jezreel.

1:6 and she conceiv again, and bare a daughter. and god said unto
him, call her name loruhamah: for I will no more have merci upon the
hous of israel; but I will utterli take them away.

1:7 but I will have merci upon the hous of judah, and will save them
bi the lord their god, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword,
nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.

1:8 now when she had wean loruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son.

1:9 then said god, call hi name loammi: for ye are not my people, and
i will not be your god.

1:10 yet the number of the children of israel shall be as the sand of
th sea, which cannot be measur nor numbered; and it shall come to
pass, that in the place where it wa said unto them, Ye are not my
people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the son of the
liv god.

1:11 then shall the children of judah and the children of israel be
gath together, and appoint themselv one head, and they shall
com up out of the land: for great shall be the day of jezreel.

2:1 say ye unto your brethren, ammi; and to your sisters, ruhamah.

2:2 plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am
i her husband: let her therefor put away her whoredom out of her
sight, and her adulteri from between her breasts; 2:3 lest I strip
her naked, and set her as in the day that she wa born, and make her
a a wilderness, and set her like a dri land, and slay her with
thirst.

2:4 and I will not have merci upon her children; for they be the
children of whoredoms.

2:5 for their mother hath play the harlot: she that conceiv them
hath done shamefully: for she said, I will go after my lovers, that
giv me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my
drink.

2:6 therefore, behold, I will hedg up thi way with thorns, and make a
wall, that she shall not find her paths.

2:7 and she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake
them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find them: then shall she
say, I will go and return to my first husband; for then wa it better
with me than now.

2:8 for she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and
multipli her silver and gold, which they prepar for baal.

2:9 therefor will I return, and take away my corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recov my wool
and my flax given to cover her nakedness.

2:10 and now will I discov her lewd in the sight of her lovers,
and none shall deliv her out of mine hand.

2:11 I will also caus all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new
moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.

2:12 and I will destroy her vine and her fig trees, whereof she hath
said, these are my reward that my lover have given me: and I will
mak them a forest, and the beast of the field shall eat them.

2:13 and I will visit upon her the day of baalim, wherein she burned
incens to them, and she deck herself with her ear and her
jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the lord.

2:14 therefore, behold, I will allur her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfort unto her.

2:15 and I will give her her vineyard from thence, and the valley of
achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing there, as in the day of
her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of
egypt.

2:16 and it shall be at that day, saith the lord, that thou shalt call
m ishi; and shalt call me no more baali.

2:17 for I will take away the name of baalim out of her mouth, and
they shall no more be rememb by their name.

2:18 and in that day will I make a coven for them with the beasts
of the field and with the fowl of heaven, and with the creeping
th of the ground: and I will break the bow and the sword and the
battl out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.

2:19 and I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth
the unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in lovingkindness,
and in mercies.

2:20 I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness: and thou shalt
know the lord.

2:21 and it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, saith the
lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; 2:22 and
th earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they
shal hear jezreel.

2:23 and I will sow her unto me in the earth; and I will have mercy
upon her that had not obtain mercy; and I will say to them which
wer not my people, thou art my people; and they shall say, thou art
mi god.

3:1 then said the lord unto me, Go yet, love a woman belov of her
friend, yet an adulteress, accord to the love of the lord toward
th children of israel, who look to other gods, and love flagon of
wine.

3:2 So I bought her to me for fifteen piec of silver, and for an
hom of barley, and an half homer of barley: 3:3 and I said unto her,
thou shalt abid for me mani days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and
thou shalt not be for anoth man: so will I also be for thee.

3:4 for the children of israel shall abid mani day without a king,
and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image,
and without an ephod, and without teraphim: 3:5 afterward shall the
children of israel return, and seek the lord their god, and david
their king; and shall fear the lord and hi good in the latter
days.

4:1 hear the word of the lord, ye children of israel: for the lord
hath a controversi with the inhabit of the land, becaus there is
no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledg of god in the land.

4:2 By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood.

4:3 therefor shall the land mourn, and everi one that dwelleth
therein shall languish, with the beast of the field, and with the
fowl of heaven; yea, the fish of the sea also shall be taken away.

4:4 yet let no man strive, nor reprov another: for thi peopl are as
they that strive with the priest.

4:5 therefor shalt thou fall in the day, and the prophet also shall
fal with thee in the night, and I will destroy thi mother.

4:6 My peopl are destroy for lack of knowledge: becaus thou hast
reject knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no
priest to me: see thou hast forgotten the law of thi god, I will
also forget thi children.

4:7 As they were increased, so they sin against me: therefor will
i chang their glori into shame.

4:8 they eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on
their iniquity.

4:9 and there shall be, like people, like priest: and I will punish
them for their ways, and reward them their doings.

4:10 for they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commit
whoredom, and shall not increase: becaus they have left off to take
he to the lord.

4:11 whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.

4:12 My peopl ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declareth
unto them: for the spirit of whoredom hath caus them to err, and
they have gone a whore from under their god.

4:13 they sacrific upon the top of the mountains, and burn incense
upon the hills, under oak and poplar and elms, becaus the shadow
thereof is good: therefor your daughter shall commit whoredom, and
your spous shall commit adultery.

4:14 I will not punish your daughter when they commit whoredom, nor
your spous when they commit adultery: for themselv are separated
with whores, and they sacrific with harlots: therefor the people
that doth not understand shall fall.

4:15 though thou, israel, play the harlot, yet let not judah offend;
and come not ye unto gilgal, neither go ye up to bethaven, nor swear,
th lord liveth.

4:16 for israel slideth back as a backslid heifer: now the lord
wil feed them as a lamb in a larg place.

4:17 ephraim is join to idols: let him alone.

4:18 their drink is sour: they have commit whoredom continually:
h ruler with shame do love, give ye.

4:19 the wind hath bound her up in her wings, and they shall be
asham becaus of their sacrifices.

5:1 hear ye this, O priests; and hearken, ye hous of israel; and give
y ear, O hous of the king; for judgment is toward you, becaus ye
hav been a snare on mizpah, and a net spread upon tabor.

5:2 and the revolt are profound to make slaughter, though I have
been a rebuk of them all.

5:3 I know ephraim, and israel is not hid from me: for now, O ephraim,
th committest whoredom, and israel is defiled.

5:4 they will not frame their do to turn unto their god: for the
spirit of whoredom is in the midst of them, and they have not known
th lord.

5:5 and the pride of israel doth testifi to hi face: therefor shall
israel and ephraim fall in their iniquity: judah also shall fall with
them.

5:6 they shall go with their flock and with their herd to seek the
lord; but they shall not find him; he hath withdrawn himself from
them.

5:7 they have dealt treacher against the lord: for they have
begotten strang children: now shall a month devour them with their
portions.

5:8 blow ye the cornet in gibeah, and the trumpet in ramah: cri aloud
at bethaven, after thee, O benjamin.

5:9 ephraim shall be desol in the day of rebuke: among the tribes
of israel have I made known that which shall sure be.

5:10 the princ of judah were like them that remov the bound:
therefor I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.

5:11 ephraim is oppress and broken in judgment, becaus he willingly
walk after the commandment.

5:12 therefor will I be unto ephraim as a moth, and to the hous of
judah as rottenness.

5:13 when ephraim saw hi sickness, and judah saw hi wound, then went
ephraim to the assyrian, and sent to king jareb: yet could he not heal
you, nor cure you of your wound.

5:14 for I will be unto ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the
hous of judah: I, even I, will tear and go away; I will take away,
and none shall rescu him.

5:15 I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledg their
offence, and seek my face: in their afflict they will seek me
early.

6:1 come, and let us return unto the lord: for he hath torn, and he
wil heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up.

6:2 after two day will he reviv us: in the third day he will raise
u up, and we shall live in hi sight.

6:3 then shall we know, if we follow on to know the lord: hi going
forth is prepar as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the
rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth.

6:4 O ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O judah, what shall I do
unto thee? for your good is as a morn cloud, and as the early
dew it goeth away.

6:5 therefor have I hew them by the prophets; I have slain them by
th word of my mouth: and thi judgment are as the light that goeth
forth.

6:6 for I desir mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledg of god
mor than burnt offerings.

6:7 but they like men have transgress the covenant: there have they
dealt treacher against me.

6:8 gilead is a citi of them that work iniquity, and is pollut with
blood.

6:9 and as troop of robber wait for a man, so the compani of priests
murd in the way by consent: for they commit lewdness.

6:10 I have seen an horribl thing in the hous of israel: there is
th whoredom of ephraim, israel is defiled.

6:11 also, O judah, he hath set an harvest for thee, when I returned
th captiv of my people.

7:1 when I would have heal israel, then the iniqu of ephraim was
discovered, and the wicked of samaria: for they commit falsehood;
and the thief cometh in, and the troop of robber spoileth without.

7:2 and they consid not in their heart that I rememb all their
wickedness: now their own do have beset them about; they are
befor my face.

7:3 they make the king glad with their wickedness, and the princes
with their lies.

7:4 they are all adulterers, as an oven heat by the baker, who
ceaseth from rais after he hath knead the dough, until it be
leavened.

7:5 In the day of our king the princ have made him sick with bottles
of wine; he stretch out hi hand with scorners.

7:6 for they have made readi their heart like an oven, while they lie
in wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in the morn it burneth
a a flame fire.

7:7 they are all hot as an oven, and have devour their judges; all
their king are fallen: there is none among them that calleth unto me.

7:8 ephraim, he hath mix himself among the people; ephraim is a cake
not turned.

7:9 stranger have devour hi strength, and he knoweth it not: yea,
gray hair are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not.

7:10 and the pride of israel testifieth to hi face: and they do not
return to the lord their god, nor seek him for all this.

7:11 ephraim also is like a silli dove without heart: they call to
egypt, they go to assyria.

7:12 when they shall go, I will spread my net upon them; I will bring
them down as the fowl of the heaven; I will chastis them, as their
congreg hath heard.

7:13 woe unto them! for they have fled from me: destruct unto them!
becaus they have transgress against me: though I have redeemed
them, yet they have spoken lie against me.

7:14 and they have not cri unto me with their heart, when they
howl upon their beds: they assembl themselv for corn and wine,
and they rebel against me.

7:15 though I have bound and strengthen their arms, yet do they
imagin mischief against me.

7:16 they return, but not to the most high: they are like a deceitful
bow: their princ shall fall by the sword for the rage of their
tongue: thi shall be their deris in the land of egypt.

8:1 set the trumpet to thi mouth. He shall come as an eagl against
th hous of the lord, becaus they have transgress my covenant, and
trespass against my law.

8:2 israel shall cri unto me, My god, we know thee.

8:3 israel hath cast off the thing that is good: the enemi shall
pursu him.

8:4 they have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and
i knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them
idols, that they may be cut off.

8:5 thi calf, O samaria, hath cast thee off; mine anger is kindled
against them: how long will it be ere they attain to innocency?  8:6
for from israel wa it also: the workman made it; therefor it is not
god: but the calf of samaria shall be broken in pieces.

8:7 for they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind: it
hath no stalk; the bud shall yield no meal: if so be it yield, the
strang shall swallow it up.

8:8 israel is swallow up: now shall they be among the gentil as a
vessel wherein is no pleasure.

8:9 for they are gone up to assyria, a wild ass alon by himself:
ephraim hath hire lovers.

8:10 yea, though they have hire among the nations, now will I gather
them, and they shall sorrow a littl for the burden of the king of
princes.

8:11 becaus ephraim hath made mani altar to sin, altar shall be
unto him to sin.

8:12 I have written to him the great thing of my law, but they were
count as a strang thing.

8:13 they sacrific flesh for the sacrific of mine offerings, and
eat it; but the lord accepteth them not; now will he rememb their
iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to egypt.

8:14 for israel hath forgotten hi maker, and buildeth temples; and
judah hath multipli fenc cities: but I will send a fire upon his
cities, and it shall devour the palac thereof.

9:1 rejoic not, O israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast
gon a whore from thi god, thou hast love a reward upon every
cornfloor.

9:2 the floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine
shal fail in her.

9:3 they shall not dwell in the lord' land; but ephraim shall return
to egypt, and they shall eat unclean thing in assyria.

9:4 they shall not offer wine offer to the lord, neither shall
they be pleas unto him: their sacrific shall be unto them as the
bread of mourners; all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for their
bread for their soul shall not come into the hous of the lord.

9:5 what will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of
th lord?  9:6 for, lo, they are gone becaus of destruction: egypt
shal gather them up, memphi shall buri them: the pleasant place for
their silver, nettl shall possess them: thorn shall be in their
tabernacles.

9:7 the day of visit are come, the day of recomp are come;
israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the spiritu man is mad,
for the multitud of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.

9:8 the watchman of ephraim wa with my god: but the prophet is a
snar of a fowler in all hi ways, and hatr in the hous of hi god.

9:9 they have deepli corrupt themselves, as in the day of gibeah:
therefor he will rememb their iniquity, he will visit their sins.

9:10 I found israel like grape in the wilderness; I saw your fathers
a the firstrip in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to
baalpeor, and separ themselv unto that shame; and their
abomin were accord as they loved.

9:11 As for ephraim, their glori shall fli away like a bird, from the
birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.

9:12 though they bring up their children, yet will I bereav them,
that there shall not be a man left: yea, woe also to them when i
depart from them!  9:13 ephraim, as I saw tyrus, is plant in a
pleas place: but ephraim shall bring forth hi children to the
murderer.

9:14 give them, O lord: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarrying
womb and dri breasts.

9:15 all their wicked is in gilgal: for there I hate them: for
th wicked of their do I will drive them out of mine house, i
wil love them no more: all their princ are revolters.

9:16 ephraim is smitten, their root is dri up, they shall bear no
fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved
fruit of their womb.

9:17 My god will cast them away, becaus they did not hearken unto
him: and they shall be wander among the nations.

10:1 israel is an empti vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself:
accord to the multitud of hi fruit he hath increas the altars;
accord to the good of hi land they have made goodli images.

10:2 their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty: he shall
break down their altars, he shall spoil their images.

10:3 for now they shall say, We have no king, becaus we fear not
th lord; what then should a king do to us?  10:4 they have spoken
words, swear fals in make a covenant: thu judgment springeth
up as hemlock in the furrow of the field.

10:5 the inhabit of samaria shall fear becaus of the calv of
bethaven: for the peopl thereof shall mourn over it, and the priests
thereof that rejoic on it, for the glori thereof, becaus it is
depart from it.

10:6 It shall be also carri unto assyria for a present to king
jareb: ephraim shall receiv shame, and israel shall be asham of his
own counsel.

10:7 As for samaria, her king is cut off as the foam upon the water.

10:8 the high place also of aven, the sin of israel, shall be
destroyed: the thorn and the thistl shall come up on their altars;
and they shall say to the mountains, cover us; and to the hills, fall
on us.

10:9 O israel, thou hast sin from the day of gibeah: there they
stood: the battl in gibeah against the children of iniqu did not
overtak them.

10:10 It is in my desir that I should chastis them; and the people
shal be gather against them, when they shall bind themselv in
their two furrows.

10:11 and ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread
out the corn; but I pass over upon her fair neck: I will make
ephraim to ride; judah shall plow, and jacob shall break hi clods.

10:12 sow to yourselv in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your
fallow ground: for it is time to seek the lord, till he come and rain
right upon you.

10:13 Ye have plow wickedness, ye have reap iniquity; ye have
eaten the fruit of lies: becaus thou didst trust in thi way, in the
multitud of thi mighti men.

10:14 therefor shall a tumult aris among thi people, and all thy
fortress shall be spoiled, as shalman spoil betharbel in the day
of battle: the mother wa dash in piec upon her children.

10:15 So shall bethel do unto you becaus of your great wickedness: in
a morn shall the king of israel utterli be cut off.

11:1 when israel wa a child, then I love him, and call my son out
of egypt.

11:2 As they call them, so they went from them: they sacrif unto
baalim, and burn incens to graven images.

11:3 I taught ephraim also to go, take them by their arms; but they
knew not that I heal them.

11:4 I drew them with cord of a man, with band of love: and I wa to
them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat
unto them.

11:5 He shall not return into the land of egypt, and the assyrian
shal be hi king, becaus they refus to return.

11:6 and the sword shall abid on hi cities, and shall consum his
branches, and devour them, becaus of their own counsels.

11:7 and my peopl are bent to backslid from me: though they called
them to the most high, none at all would exalt him.

11:8 how shall I give thee up, ephraim? how shall I deliv thee,
israel?  how shall I make thee as admah? how shall I set thee as
zeboim? mine heart is turn within me, my repent are kindled
together.

11:9 I will not execut the fierc of mine anger, I will not
return to destroy ephraim: for I am god, and not man; the holi one in
th midst of thee: and I will not enter into the city.

11:10 they shall walk after the lord: he shall roar like a lion: when
h shall roar, then the children shall trembl from the west.

11:11 they shall trembl as a bird out of egypt, and as a dove out of
th land of assyria: and I will place them in their houses, saith the
lord.

11:12 ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the hous of israel
with deceit: but judah yet ruleth with god, and is faith with the
saints.

12:1 ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind: he
daili increaseth lie and desolation; and they do make a coven with
th assyrians, and oil is carri into egypt.

12:2 the lord hath also a controversi with judah, and will punish
jacob accord to hi ways; accord to hi do will he
recompens him.

12:3 He took hi brother by the heel in the womb, and by hi strength
h had power with god: 12:4 yea, he had power over the angel, and
prevailed: he wept, and made supplic unto him: he found him in
bethel, and there he spake with us; 12:5 even the lord god of hosts;
th lord is hi memorial.

12:6 therefor turn thou to thi god: keep merci and judgment and wait
on thi god continually.

12:7 He is a merchant, the balanc of deceit are in hi hand: he
loveth to oppress.

12:8 and ephraim said, yet I am becom rich, I have found me out
substance: in all my labour they shall find none iniqu in me that
wer sin.

12:9 and I that am the lord thi god from the land of egypt will yet
mak thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the day of the solemn feast.

12:10 I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied
visions, and use similitudes, by the ministri of the prophets.

12:11 Is there iniqu in gilead? sure they are vanity: they
sacrific bullock in gilgal; yea, their altar are as heap in the
furrow of the fields.

12:12 and jacob fled into the countri of syria, and israel serv for
a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.

12:13 and by a prophet the lord brought israel out of egypt, and by a
prophet wa he preserved.

12:14 ephraim provok him to anger most bitterly: therefor shall he
leav hi blood upon him, and hi reproach shall hi lord return unto
him.

13:1 when ephraim spake trembling, he exalt himself in israel; but
when he offend in baal, he died.

13:2 and now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images
of their silver, and idol accord to their own understanding, all
of it the work of the craftsmen: they say of them, let the men that
sacrific kiss the calves.

13:3 therefor they shall be as the morn cloud and as the earli dew
that passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out
of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.

13:4 yet I am the lord thi god from the land of egypt, and thou shalt
know no god but me: for there is no saviour besid me.

13:5 I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.

13:6 accord to their pasture, so were they filled; they were
filled, and their heart wa exalted; therefor have they forgotten me.

13:7 therefor I will be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way
wil I observ them: 13:8 I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved
of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart, and there will i
devour them like a lion: the wild beast shall tear them.

13:9 O israel, thou hast destroy thyself; but in me is thine help.

13:10 I will be thi king: where is ani other that may save thee in all
thi cities? and thi judg of whom thou saidst, give me a king and
princes?  13:11 I gave thee a king in mine anger, and took him away in
mi wrath.

13:12 the iniqu of ephraim is bound up; hi sin is hid.

13:13 the sorrow of a travail woman shall come upon him: he is an
unwis son; for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking
forth of children.

13:14 I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem
them from death: O death, I will be thi plagues; O grave, I will be
thi destruction: repent shall be hid from mine eyes.

13:15 though he be fruit among hi brethren, an east wind shall
come, the wind of the lord shall come up from the wilderness, and his
spr shall becom dry, and hi fountain shall be dri up: he shall
spoil the treasur of all pleasant vessels.

13:16 samaria shall becom desolate; for she hath rebel against her
god: they shall fall by the sword: their infant shall be dash in
pieces, and their women with child shall be rip up.

14:1 O israel, return unto the lord thi god; for thou hast fallen by
thin iniquity.

14:2 take with you words, and turn to the lord: say unto him, take
away all iniquity, and receiv us graciously: so will we render the
calv of our lips.

14:3 asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither
wil we say ani more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in
the the fatherless findeth mercy.

14:4 I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine
ang is turn away from him.

14:5 I will be as the dew unto israel: he shall grow as the lily, and
cast forth hi root as lebanon.

14:6 hi branch shall spread, and hi beauti shall be as the olive
tree, and hi smell as lebanon.

14:7 they that dwell under hi shadow shall return; they shall revive
a the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the
win of lebanon.

14:8 ephraim shall say, what have I to do ani more with idols? I have
heard him, and observ him: I am like a green fir tree. from me is
thi fruit found.

14:9 who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and
h shall know them? for the way of the lord are right, and the just
shal walk in them: but the transgressor shall fall therein.




joel


1:1 the word of the lord that came to joel the son of pethuel.

1:2 hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabit of the land.

hath thi been in your days, or even in the day of your fathers?  1:3
tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their
children, and their children anoth generation.

1:4 that which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten; and
that which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten; and that
which the cankerworm hath left hath the caterpil eaten.

1:5 awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinker of wine,
becaus of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.

1:6 for a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number,
whos teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth of a
great lion.

1:7 He hath laid my vine waste, and bark my fig tree: he hath made
it clean bare, and cast it away; the branch thereof are made white.

1:8 lament like a virgin gird with sackcloth for the husband of her
youth.

1:9 the meat offer and the drink offer is cut off from the house
of the lord; the priests, the lord' ministers, mourn.

1:10 the field is wasted, the land mourneth; for the corn is wasted:
th new wine is dri up, the oil languisheth.

1:11 Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen; howl, O ye vinedressers, for the
wheat and for the barley; becaus the harvest of the field is
perished.

1:12 the vine is dri up, and the fig tree languisheth; the
pomegran tree, the palm tree also, and the appl tree, even all the
tre of the field, are withered: becaus joy is wither away from
th son of men.

1:13 gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests: howl, ye minist of
th altar: come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye minist of my god:
for the meat offer and the drink offer is withholden from the
hous of your god.

1:14 sanctifi ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elder and
al the inhabit of the land into the hous of the lord your god,
and cri unto the lord, 1:15 ala for the day! for the day of the lord
i at hand, and as a destruct from the almighti shall it come.

1:16 Is not the meat cut off befor our eyes, yea, joy and gladness
from the hous of our god?  1:17 the seed is rotten under their clods,
th garner are laid desolate, the barn are broken down; for the corn
i withered.

1:18 how do the beast groan! the herd of cattl are perplexed,
becaus they have no pasture; yea, the flock of sheep are made
desolate.

1:19 O lord, to thee will I cry: for the fire hath devour the
pastur of the wilderness, and the flame hath burn all the tree of
th field.

1:20 the beast of the field cri also unto thee: for the river of
wat are dri up, and the fire hath devour the pastur of the
wilderness.

2:1 blow ye the trumpet in zion, and sound an alarm in my holy
mountain: let all the inhabit of the land tremble: for the day of
th lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand; 2:2 A day of dark and of
gloominess, a day of cloud and of thick darkness, as the morning
spread upon the mountains: a great peopl and a strong; there hath not
been ever the like, neither shall be ani more after it, even to the
year of mani generations.

2:3 A fire devoureth befor them; and behind them a flame burneth: the
land is as the garden of eden befor them, and behind them a desolate
wilderness; yea, and noth shall escap them.

2:4 the appear of them is as the appear of horses; and as
horsemen, so shall they run.

2:5 like the nois of chariot on the top of mountain shall they
leap, like the nois of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as
a strong peopl set in battl array.

2:6 befor their face the peopl shall be much pained: all face shall
gath blackness.

2:7 they shall run like mighti men; they shall climb the wall like men
of war; and they shall march everi one on hi ways, and they shall not
break their ranks: 2:8 neither shall one thrust another; they shall
walk everi one in hi path: and when they fall upon the sword, they
shal not be wounded.

2:9 they shall run to and fro in the city; they shall run upon the
wall, they shall climb up upon the houses; they shall enter in at the
window like a thief.

2:10 the earth shall quak befor them; the heaven shall tremble: the
sun and the moon shall be dark, and the star shall withdraw their
shining: 2:11 and the lord shall utter hi voic befor hi army: for
hi camp is veri great: for he is strong that executeth hi word: for
th day of the lord is great and veri terrible; and who can abid it?
2:12 therefor also now, saith the lord, turn ye even to me with all
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:
2:13 and rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the
lord your god: for he is graciou and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.

2:14 who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leav a blessing
behind him; even a meat offer and a drink offer unto the lord
your god?  2:15 blow the trumpet in zion, sanctifi a fast, call a
solemn assembly: 2:16 gather the people, sanctifi the congregation,
assembl the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the
breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of hi chamber, and the bride out
of her closet.

2:17 let the priests, the minist of the lord, weep between the
porch and the altar, and let them say, spare thi people, O lord, and
giv not thine heritag to reproach, that the heathen should rule over
them: wherefor should they say among the people, where is their god?
2:18 then will the lord be jealou for hi land, and piti hi people.

2:19 yea, the lord will answer and say unto hi people, behold, I will
send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfi therewith:
and I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen: 2:20 but i
wil remov far off from you the northern army, and will drive him
into a land barren and desolate, with hi face toward the east sea,
and hi hinder part toward the utmost sea, and hi stink shall come
up, and hi ill savour shall come up, becaus he hath done great
things.

2:21 fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: for the lord will do great
things.

2:22 Be not afraid, ye beast of the field: for the pastur of the
wild do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree and
th vine do yield their strength.

2:23 Be glad then, ye children of zion, and rejoic in the lord your
god: for he hath given you the former rain moderately, and he will
caus to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter
rain in the first month.

2:24 and the floor shall be full of wheat, and the vat shall
overflow with wine and oil.

2:25 and I will restor to you the year that the locust hath eaten,
th cankerworm, and the caterpiller, and the palmerworm, my great army
which I sent among you.

2:26 and ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and prais the name
of the lord your god, that hath dealt wondrous with you: and my
peopl shall never be ashamed.

2:27 and ye shall know that I am in the midst of israel, and that I am
th lord your god, and none else: and my peopl shall never be
ashamed.

2:28 and it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh; and your son and your daughter shall
prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see
visions: 2:29 and also upon the servant and upon the handmaid in
thos day will I pour out my spirit.

2:30 and I will shew wonder in the heaven and in the earth, blood,
and fire, and pillar of smoke.

2:31 the sun shall be turn into darkness, and the moon into blood,
befor the great and terribl day of the lord come.

2:32 and it shall come to pass, that whosoev shall call on the name
of the lord shall be delivered: for in mount zion and in jerusalem
shal be deliverance, as the lord hath said, and in the remnant whom
th lord shall call.

3:1 for, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring
again the captiv of judah and jerusalem, 3:2 I will also gather all
nations, and will bring them down into the valley of jehoshaphat, and
wil plead with them there for my peopl and for my heritag israel,
whom they have scatter among the nations, and part my land.

3:3 and they have cast lot for my people; and have given a boy for an
harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.

3:4 yea, and what have ye to do with me, O tyre, and zidon, and all
th coast of palestine? will ye render me a recompence? and if ye
recompens me, swiftli and speedili will I return your recomp upon
your own head; 3:5 becaus ye have taken my silver and my gold, and
hav carri into your templ my goodli pleasant things: 3:6 the
children also of judah and the children of jerusalem have ye sold unto
th grecians, that ye might remov them far from their border.

3:7 behold, I will rais them out of the place whither ye have sold
them, and will return your recomp upon your own head: 3:8 and i
wil sell your son and your daughter into the hand of the children
of judah, and they shall sell them to the sabeans, to a peopl far
off: for the lord hath spoken it.

3:9 proclaim ye thi among the gentiles; prepar war, wake up the
mighti men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up: 3:10
beat your plowshar into sword and your pruninghook into spears:
let the weak say, I am strong.

3:11 assembl yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather
yourselv togeth round about: thither caus thi mighti one to come
down, O lord.

3:12 let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of
jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judg all the heathen round
about.

3:13 put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you
down; for the press is full, the fat overflow; for their wickedness
i great.

3:14 multitudes, multitud in the valley of decision: for the day of
th lord is near in the valley of decision.

3:15 the sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the star shall
withdraw their shining.

3:16 the lord also shall roar out of zion, and utter hi voic from
jerusalem; and the heaven and the earth shall shake: but the lord
wil be the hope of hi people, and the strength of the children of
israel.

3:17 So shall ye know that I am the lord your god dwell in zion, my
holi mountain: then shall jerusalem be holy, and there shall no
strang pass through her ani more.

3:18 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountain shall
drop down new wine, and the hill shall flow with milk, and all the
riv of judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come
forth out of the hous of the lord, and shall water the valley of
shittim.

3:19 egypt shall be a desolation, and edom shall be a desolate
wilderness, for the violenc against the children of judah, because
they have shed innoc blood in their land.

3:20 but judah shall dwell for ever, and jerusalem from gener to
generation.

3:21 for I will cleans their blood that I have not cleansed: for the
lord dwelleth in zion.




amos


1:1 the word of amos, who wa among the herdmen of tekoa, which he
saw concern israel in the day of uzziah king of judah, and in the
day of jeroboam the son of joash king of israel, two year befor the
earthquake.

1:2 and he said, the lord will roar from zion, and utter hi voice
from jerusalem; and the habit of the shepherd shall mourn, and
th top of carmel shall wither.

1:3 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of damascus, and for
four, I will not turn away the punish thereof; becaus they have
thresh gilead with thresh instrument of iron: 1:4 but I will
send a fire into the hous of hazael, which shall devour the palaces
of benhadad.

1:5 I will break also the bar of damascus, and cut off the inhabitant
from the plain of aven, and him that holdeth the sceptr from the
hous of eden: and the peopl of syria shall go into captiv unto
kir, saith the lord.

1:6 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of gaza, and for
four, I will not turn away the punish thereof; becaus they
carri away captiv the whole captivity, to deliv them up to edom:
1:7 but I will send a fire on the wall of gaza, which shall devour the
palac thereof: 1:8 and I will cut off the inhabit from ashdod,
and him that holdeth the sceptr from ashkelon, and I will turn mine
hand against ekron: and the remnant of the philistin shall perish,
saith the lord god.

1:9 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of tyrus, and for
four, I will not turn away the punish thereof; becaus they
deliv up the whole captiv to edom, and rememb not the
brotherli covenant: 1:10 but I will send a fire on the wall of tyrus,
which shall devour the palac thereof.

1:11 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of edom, and for
four, I will not turn away the punish thereof; becaus he did
pursu hi brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his
ang did tear perpetually, and he kept hi wrath for ever: 1:12 but i
wil send a fire upon teman, which shall devour the palac of bozrah.

1:13 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of the children of
ammon, and for four, I will not turn away the punish thereof;
becaus they have rip up the women with child of gilead, that they
might enlarg their border: 1:14 but I will kindl a fire in the wall
of rabbah, and it shall devour the palac thereof, with shout in
th day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind: 1:15
and their king shall go into captivity, he and hi princ together,
saith the lord.

2:1 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of moab, and for
four, I will not turn away the punish thereof; becaus he burned
th bone of the king of edom into lime: 2:2 but I will send a fire
upon moab, and it shall devour the palac of kirioth: and moab shall
di with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet: 2:3
and I will cut off the judg from the midst thereof, and will slay all
th princ thereof with him, saith the lord.

2:4 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of judah, and for
four, I will not turn away the punish thereof; becaus they have
despis the law of the lord, and have not kept hi commandments, and
their lie caus them to err, after the which their father have
walked: 2:5 but I will send a fire upon judah, and it shall devour the
palac of jerusalem.

2:6 thu saith the lord; for three transgress of israel, and for
four, I will not turn away the punish thereof; becaus they sold
th righteou for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; 2:7 that
pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn
asid the way of the meek: and a man and hi father will go in unto
th same maid, to profan my holi name: 2:8 and they lay themselves
down upon cloth laid to pledg by everi altar, and they drink the
win of the condemn in the hous of their god.

2:9 yet destroy I the amorit befor them, whose height wa like the
height of the cedars, and he wa strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed
hi fruit from above, and hi root from beneath.

2:10 also I brought you up from the land of egypt, and led you forty
year through the wilderness, to possess the land of the amorite.

2:11 and I rais up of your son for prophets, and of your young men
for nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of israel? saith the
lord.

2:12 but ye gave the nazarit wine to drink; and command the
prophets, saying, prophesi not.

2:13 behold, I am press under you, as a cart is press that is full
of sheaves.

2:14 therefor the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong
shal not strengthen hi force, neither shall the mighti deliver
himself: 2:15 neither shall he stand that handleth the bow; and he
that is swift of foot shall not deliv himself: neither shall he that
rideth the hors deliv himself.

2:16 and he that is courag among the mighti shall flee away naked
in that day, saith the lord.

3:1 hear thi word that the lord hath spoken against you, O children
of israel, against the whole famili which I brought up from the land
of egypt, saying, 3:2 you onli have I known of all the famili of the
earth: therefor I will punish you for all your iniquities.

3:3 can two walk together, except they be agreed?  3:4 will a lion
roar in the forest, when he hath no prey? will a young lion cri out of
hi den, if he have taken nothing?  3:5 can a bird fall in a snare
upon the earth, where no gin is for him?  shall one take up a snare
from the earth, and have taken noth at all?  3:6 shall a trumpet be
blown in the city, and the peopl not be afraid?  shall there be evil
in a city, and the lord hath not done it?  3:7 sure the lord god
wil do nothing, but he revealeth hi secret unto hi servant the
prophets.

3:8 the lion hath roared, who will not fear? the lord god hath spoken,
who can but prophesy?  3:9 publish in the palac at ashdod, and in
th palac in the land of egypt, and say, assembl yourselv upon
th mountain of samaria, and behold the great tumult in the midst
thereof, and the oppress in the midst thereof.

3:10 for they know not to do right, saith the lord, who store up
viol and robberi in their palaces.

3:11 therefor thu saith the lord god; An adversari there shall be
even round about the land; and he shall bring down thi strength from
thee, and thi palac shall be spoiled.

3:12 thu saith the lord; As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of
th lion two legs, or a piec of an ear; so shall the children of
israel be taken out that dwell in samaria in the corner of a bed, and
in damascu in a couch.

3:13 hear ye, and testifi in the hous of jacob, saith the lord god,
th god of hosts, 3:14 that in the day that I shall visit the
transgress of israel upon him I will also visit the altar of
bethel: and the horn of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the
ground.

3:15 and I will smite the winter hous with the summer house; and the
hous of ivori shall perish, and the great hous shall have an end,
saith the lord.

4:1 hear thi word, ye kine of bashan, that are in the mountain of
samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to
their masters, bring, and let us drink.

4:2 the lord god hath sworn by hi holiness, that, lo, the day shall
com upon you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your
poster with fishhooks.

4:3 and ye shall go out at the breaches, everi cow at that which is
befor her; and ye shall cast them into the palace, saith the lord.

4:4 come to bethel, and transgress; at gilgal multipli transgression;
and bring your sacrific everi morning, and your tith after three
years: 4:5 and offer a sacrific of thanksgiv with leaven, and
proclaim and publish the free offerings: for thi liketh you, O ye
children of israel, saith the lord god.

4:6 and I also have given you clean of teeth in all your cities,
and want of bread in all your places: yet have ye not return unto
me, saith the lord.

4:7 and also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet
thre month to the harvest: and I caus it to rain upon one city,
and caus it not to rain upon anoth city: one piec wa rained
upon, and the piec whereupon it rain not withered.

4:8 So two or three citi wander unto one city, to drink water; but
they were not satisfied: yet have ye not return unto me, saith the
lord.

4:9 I have smitten you with blast and mildew: when your garden and
your vineyard and your fig tree and your oliv tree increased, the
palmerworm devour them: yet have ye not return unto me, saith the
lord.

4:10 I have sent among you the pestil after the manner of egypt:
your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your
horses; and I have made the stink of your camp to come up unto your
nostrils: yet have ye not return unto me, saith the lord.

4:11 I have overthrown some of you, as god overthrew sodom and
gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand pluck out of the burning: yet
hav ye not return unto me, saith the lord.

4:12 therefor thu will I do unto thee, O israel: and becaus I will
do thi unto thee, prepar to meet thi god, O israel.

4:13 for, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind,
and declareth unto man what is hi thought, that maketh the morning
darkness, and treadeth upon the high place of the earth, the lord,
th god of hosts, is hi name.

5:1 hear ye thi word which I take up against you, even a lamentation,
o hous of israel.

5:2 the virgin of israel is fallen; she shall no more rise: she is
forsaken upon her land; there is none to rais her up.

5:3 for thu saith the lord god; the citi that went out by a thousand
shal leav an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundr shall
leav ten, to the hous of israel.

5:4 for thu saith the lord unto the hous of israel, seek ye me, and
y shall live: 5:5 but seek not bethel, nor enter into gilgal, and
pass not to beersheba: for gilgal shall sure go into captivity, and
bethel shall come to nought.

5:6 seek the lord, and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire in
th hous of joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in
bethel.

5:7 Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leav off righteous in
th earth, 5:8 seek him that maketh the seven star and orion, and
turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark
with night: that calleth for the water of the sea, and poureth them
out upon the face of the earth: the lord is hi name: 5:9 that
strengtheneth the spoil against the strong, so that the spoiled
shal come against the fortress.

5:10 they hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that
speaketh uprightly.

5:11 forasmuch therefor as your tread is upon the poor, and ye
tak from him burden of wheat: ye have built hous of hewn stone,
but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have plant pleasant vineyards,
but ye shall not drink wine of them.

5:12 for I know your manifold transgress and your mighti sins:
they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn asid the poor
in the gate from their right.

5:13 therefor the prudent shall keep silenc in that time; for it is
an evil time.

5:14 seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the lord, the
god of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

5:15 hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the
gate: it may be that the lord god of host will be graciou unto the
remn of joseph.

5:16 therefor the lord, the god of hosts, the lord, saith thus;
wail shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the
highways, alas! alas!  and they shall call the husbandman to mourning,
and such as are skil of lament to wailing.

5:17 and in all vineyard shall be wailing: for I will pass through
thee, saith the lord.

5:18 woe unto you that desir the day of the lord! to what end is it
for you? the day of the lord is darkness, and not light.

5:19 As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went
into the house, and lean hi hand on the wall, and a serpent bit
him.

5:20 shall not the day of the lord be darkness, and not light? even
veri dark, and no bright in it?  5:21 I hate, I despis your feast
days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies.

5:22 though ye offer me burnt offer and your meat offerings, i
wil not accept them: neither will I regard the peac offer of
your fat beasts.

5:23 take thou away from me the nois of thi songs; for I will not
hear the melodi of thi viols.

5:24 but let judgment run down as waters, and righteous as a
mighti stream.

5:25 have ye offer unto me sacrific and offer in the
wild forti years, O hous of israel?  5:26 but ye have born the
tabernacl of your moloch and chiun your images, the star of your god,
which ye made to yourselves.

5:27 therefor will I caus you to go into captiv beyond damascus,
saith the lord, whose name is the god of hosts.

6:1 woe to them that are at eas in zion, and trust in the mountain of
samaria, which are name chief of the nations, to whom the hous of
israel came!  6:2 pass ye unto calneh, and see; and from thenc go ye
to hamath the great: then go down to gath of the philistines: be they
bett than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your border?
6:3 Ye that put far away the evil day, and caus the seat of violence
to come near; 6:4 that lie upon bed of ivory, and stretch themselves
upon their couches, and eat the lamb out of the flock, and the calves
out of the midst of the stall; 6:5 that chant to the sound of the
viol, and invent to themselv instrument of musick, like david; 6:6
that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselv with the chief
ointments: but they are not griev for the afflict of joseph.

6:7 therefor now shall they go captiv with the first that go
captive, and the banquet of them that stretch themselv shall be
removed.

6:8 the lord god hath sworn by himself, saith the lord the god of
hosts, I abhor the excel of jacob, and hate hi palaces:
therefor will I deliv up the citi with all that is therein.

6:9 and it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house,
that they shall die.

6:10 and a man' uncl shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to
br out the bone out of the house, and shall say unto him that is
bi the side of the house, Is there yet ani with thee? and he shall
say, no. then shall he say, hold thi tongue: for we may not make
ment of the name of the lord.

6:11 for, behold, the lord commandeth, and he will smite the great
hous with breaches, and the littl hous with clefts.

6:12 shall hors run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen?
for ye have turn judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness
into hemlock: 6:13 Ye which rejoic in a thing of nought, which say,
hav we not taken to us horn by our own strength?  6:14 but, behold,
i will rais up against you a nation, O hous of israel, saith the
lord the god of hosts; and they shall afflict you from the enter in
of hemath unto the river of the wilderness.

7:1 thu hath the lord god shew unto me; and, behold, he formed
grasshopp in the begin of the shoot up of the latter growth;
and, lo, it wa the latter growth after the king' mowings.

7:2 and it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eat the
grass of the land, then I said, O lord god, forgive, I beseech thee:
bi whom shall jacob arise? for he is small.

7:3 the lord repent for this: It shall not be, saith the lord.

7:4 thu hath the lord god shew unto me: and, behold, the lord god
cal to contend by fire, and it devour the great deep, and did eat
up a part.

7:5 then said I, O lord god, cease, I beseech thee: by whom shall
jacob arise? for he is small.

7:6 the lord repent for this: thi also shall not be, saith the lord
god.

7:7 thu he shew me: and, behold, the lord stood upon a wall made by
a plumbline, with a plumblin in hi hand.

7:8 and the lord said unto me, amos, what seest thou? and I said, a
plumbline. then said the lord, behold, I will set a plumblin in the
midst of my peopl israel: I will not again pass by them ani more: 7:9
and the high place of isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuari of
israel shall be laid waste; and I will rise against the hous of
jeroboam with the sword.

7:10 then amaziah the priest of bethel sent to jeroboam king of
israel, saying, amo hath conspir against thee in the midst of the
hous of israel: the land is not abl to bear all hi words.

7:11 for thu amo saith, jeroboam shall die by the sword, and israel
shal sure be led away captiv out of their own land.

7:12 also amaziah said unto amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away into
th land of judah, and there eat bread, and prophesi there: 7:13 but
prophesi not again ani more at bethel: for it is the king' chapel,
and it is the king' court.

7:14 then answer amos, and said to amaziah, I wa no prophet,
neith wa I a prophet' son; but I wa an herdman, and a gather of
sycomor fruit: 7:15 and the lord took me as I follow the flock, and
th lord said unto me, go, prophesi unto my peopl israel.

7:16 now therefor hear thou the word of the lord: thou sayest,
prophesi not against israel, and drop not thi word against the house
of isaac.

7:17 therefor thu saith the lord; thi wife shall be an harlot in the
city, and thi son and thi daughter shall fall by the sword, and thy
land shall be divid by line; and thou shalt die in a pollut land:
and israel shall sure go into captiv forth of hi land.

8:1 thu hath the lord god shew unto me: and behold a basket of
summ fruit.

8:2 and he said, amos, what seest thou? and I said, A basket of summer
fruit. then said the lord unto me, the end is come upon my peopl of
israel; I will not again pass by them ani more.

8:3 and the song of the templ shall be howl in that day, saith
th lord god: there shall be mani dead bodi in everi place; they
shal cast them forth with silence.

8:4 hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor
of the land to fail, 8:5 saying, when will the new moon be gone, that
w may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making
th ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifi the balanc by
deceit?  8:6 that we may buy the poor for silver, and the needi for a
pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refus of the wheat?  8:7 the lord
hath sworn by the excel of jacob, sure I will never forget any
of their works.

8:8 shall not the land trembl for this, and everi one mourn that
dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholli as a flood; and it shall
b cast out and drowned, as by the flood of egypt.

8:9 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord god, that i
wil caus the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in
th clear day: 8:10 and I will turn your feast into mourning, and all
your song into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth upon all
loins, and bald upon everi head; and I will make it as the
mourn of an onli son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.

8:11 behold, the day come, saith the lord god, that I will send a
famin in the land, not a famin of bread, nor a thirst for water, but
of hear the word of the lord: 8:12 and they shall wander from sea
to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro
to seek the word of the lord, and shall not find it.

8:13 In that day shall the fair virgin and young men faint for
thirst.

8:14 they that swear by the sin of samaria, and say, thi god, O dan,
liveth; and, the manner of beersheba liveth; even they shall fall, and
nev rise up again.

9:1 I saw the lord stand upon the altar: and he said, smite the
lintel of the door, that the post may shake: and cut them in the
head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he
that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them
shal not be delivered.

9:2 though they dig into hell, thenc shall mine hand take them;
though they climb up to heaven, thenc will I bring them down: 9:3 and
though they hide themselv in the top of carmel, I will search and
tak them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the
bottom of the sea, thenc will I command the serpent, and he shall
bit them: 9:4 and though they go into captiv befor their enemies,
th will I command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will
set mine eye upon them for evil, and not for good.

9:5 and the lord god of host is he that toucheth the land, and it
shal melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn: and it shall rise
up wholli like a flood; and shall be drowned, as by the flood of
egypt.

9:6 It is he that buildeth hi stori in the heaven, and hath founded
hi troop in the earth; he that calleth for the water of the sea, and
poureth them out upon the face of the earth: the lord is hi name.

9:7 are ye not as children of the ethiopian unto me, O children of
israel? saith the lord. have not I brought up israel out of the land
of egypt? and the philistin from caphtor, and the syrian from kir?
9:8 behold, the eye of the lord god are upon the sin kingdom, and
i will destroy it from off the face of the earth; save that I will
not utterli destroy the hous of jacob, saith the lord.

9:9 for, lo, I will command, and I will sift the hous of israel among
al nations, like as corn is sift in a sieve, yet shall not the
least grain fall upon the earth.

9:10 all the sinner of my peopl shall die by the sword, which say,
th evil shall not overtak nor prevent us.

9:11 In that day will I rais up the tabernacl of david that is
fallen, and close up the breach thereof; and I will rais up his
ruins, and I will build it as in the day of old: 9:12 that they may
possess the remnant of edom, and of all the heathen, which are called
bi my name, saith the lord that doeth this.

9:13 behold, the day come, saith the lord, that the plowman shall
overtak the reaper, and the treader of grape him that soweth seed;
and the mountain shall drop sweet wine, and all the hill shall melt.

9:14 and I will bring again the captiv of my peopl of israel, and
they shall build the wast cities, and inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make
gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

9:15 and I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be
pul up out of their land which I have given them, saith the lord
thi god.




obadiah


1:1 the vision of obadiah. thu saith the lord god concern edom;
w have heard a rumour from the lord, and an ambassador is sent among
th heathen, aris ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.

1:2 behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly
despised.

1:3 the pride of thine heart hath deceiv thee, thou that dwellest in
th cleft of the rock, whose habit is high; that saith in his
heart, who shall bring me down to the ground?  1:4 though thou exalt
thyself as the eagle, and though thou set thi nest among the stars,
thenc will I bring thee down, saith the lord.

1:5 If thiev came to thee, if robber by night, (how art thou cut
off!)  would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the
grapegather came to thee, would they not leav some grapes?  1:6
how are the thing of esau search out! how are hi hidden things
sought up!  1:7 all the men of thi confederaci have brought thee even
to the border: the men that were at peac with thee have deceived
thee, and prevail against thee; that they eat thi bread have laid a
wound under thee: there is none understand in him.

1:8 shall I not in that day, saith the lord, even destroy the wise men
out of edom, and understand out of the mount of esau?  1:9 and thy
mighti men, O teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that everi one of
th mount of esau may be cut off by slaughter.

1:10 for thi violenc against thi brother jacob shame shall cover
thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever.

1:11 In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that
th stranger carri away captiv hi forces, and foreign entered
into hi gates, and cast lot upon jerusalem, even thou wast as one of
them.

1:12 but thou shouldest not have look on the day of thi brother in
th day that he becam a stranger; neither shouldest thou have
rejo over the children of judah in the day of their destruction;
neith shouldest thou have spoken proudli in the day of distress.

1:13 thou shouldest not have enter into the gate of my peopl in the
day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have look on their
afflict in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hand on their
subst in the day of their calamity; 1:14 neither shouldest thou
hav stood in the crossway, to cut off those of hi that did escape;
neith shouldest thou have deliv up those of hi that did remain
in the day of distress.

1:15 for the day of the lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou
hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thi reward shall return upon
thin own head.

1:16 for as ye have drunk upon my holi mountain, so shall all the
heathen drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall
swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not been.

1:17 but upon mount zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness; and the hous of jacob shall possess their possessions.

1:18 and the hous of jacob shall be a fire, and the hous of joseph a
flame, and the hous of esau for stubble, and they shall kindl in
them, and devour them; and there shall not be ani remain of the
hous of esau; for the lord hath spoken it.

1:19 and they of the south shall possess the mount of esau; and they
of the plain the philistines: and they shall possess the field of
ephraim, and the field of samaria: and benjamin shall possess gilead.

1:20 and the captiv of thi host of the children of israel shall
possess that of the canaanites, even unto zarephath; and the captivity
of jerusalem, which is in sepharad, shall possess the citi of the
south.

1:21 and saviour shall come up on mount zion to judg the mount of
esau; and the kingdom shall be the lord's.




jonah


1:1 now the word of the lord came unto jonah the son of amittai,
saying, 1:2 arise, go to nineveh, that great city, and cri against it;
for their wicked is come up befor me.

1:3 but jonah rose up to flee unto tarshish from the presenc of the
lord, and went down to joppa; and he found a ship go to tarshish:
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them
unto tarshish from the presenc of the lord.

1:4 but the lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there wa a
mighti tempest in the sea, so that the ship wa like to be broken.

1:5 then the marin were afraid, and cri everi man unto hi god,
and cast forth the ware that were in the ship into the sea, to
lighten it of them. but jonah wa gone down into the side of the
ship; and he lay, and wa fast asleep.

1:6 So the shipmast came to him, and said unto him, what meanest
thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thi god, if so be that god will
think upon us, that we perish not.

1:7 and they said everi one to hi fellow, come, and let us cast lots,
that we may know for whose caus thi evil is upon us. So they cast
lots, and the lot fell upon jonah.

1:8 then said they unto him, tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause
thi evil is upon us; what is thine occupation? and whenc comest
thou? what is thi country? and of what peopl art thou?  1:9 and he
said unto them, I am an hebrew; and I fear the lord, the god of
heaven, which hath made the sea and the dri land.

1:10 then were the men exceedingli afraid, and said unto him. whi hast
thou done this? for the men knew that he fled from the presenc of the
lord, becaus he had told them.

1:11 then said they unto him, what shall we do unto thee, that the sea
may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and wa tempestuous.

1:12 and he said unto them, take me up, and cast me forth into the
sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake
thi great tempest is upon you.

1:13 nevertheless the men row hard to bring it to the land; but they
could not: for the sea wrought, and wa tempestu against them.

1:14 wherefor they cri unto the lord, and said, We beseech thee, o
lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish for thi man' life, and lay
not upon us innoc blood: for thou, O lord, hast done as it pleased
thee.

1:15 So they look up jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the
sea ceas from her raging.

1:16 then the men fear the lord exceedingly, and offer a sacrifice
unto the lord, and made vows.

1:17 now the lord had prepar a great fish to swallow up jonah. and
jonah wa in the belli of the fish three day and three nights.

2:1 then jonah pray unto the lord hi god out of the fish' belly,
2:2 and said, I cri by reason of mine afflict unto the lord, and
h heard me; out of the belli of hell cri I, and thou heardest my
voice.

2:3 for thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas;
and the flood compass me about: all thi billow and thi waves
pass over me.

2:4 then I said, I am cast out of thi sight; yet I will look again
toward thi holi temple.

2:5 the water compass me about, even to the soul: the depth closed
m round about, the weed were wrap about my head.

2:6 I went down to the bottom of the mountains; the earth with her
bar wa about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from
corruption, O lord my god.

2:7 when my soul faint within me I rememb the lord: and my
pray came in unto thee, into thine holi temple.

2:8 they that observ lie vaniti forsak their own mercy.

2:9 but I will sacrific unto thee with the voic of thanksgiving; i
wil pay that that I have vowed. salvat is of the lord.

2:10 and the lord spake unto the fish, and it vomit out jonah upon
th dri land.

3:1 and the word of the lord came unto jonah the second time, saying,
3:2 arise, go unto nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the
preach that I bid thee.

3:3 So jonah arose, and went unto nineveh, accord to the word of
th lord. now nineveh wa an exceed great citi of three days'
journey.

3:4 and jonah began to enter into the citi a day' journey, and he
cried, and said, yet forti days, and nineveh shall be overthrown.

3:5 So the peopl of nineveh believ god, and proclaim a fast, and
put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.

3:6 for word came unto the king of nineveh, and he aros from his
throne, and he laid hi robe from him, and cover him with sackcloth,
and sat in ashes.

3:7 and he caus it to be proclaim and publish through nineveh by
th decre of the king and hi nobles, saying, let neither man nor
beast, herd nor flock, tast ani thing: let them not feed, nor drink
water: 3:8 but let man and beast be cover with sackcloth, and cry
mightili unto god: yea, let them turn everi one from hi evil way, and
from the violenc that is in their hands.

3:9 who can tell if god will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierc anger, that we perish not?  3:10 and god saw their works, that
they turn from their evil way; and god repent of the evil, that he
had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not.

4:1 but it displeas jonah exceedingly, and he wa veri angry.

4:2 and he pray unto the lord, and said, I pray thee, O lord, was
not thi my saying, when I wa yet in my country? therefor I fled
befor unto tarshish: for I knew that thou art a graciou god, and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of
th evil.

4:3 therefor now, O lord, take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for
it is better for me to die than to live.

4:4 then said the lord, doest thou well to be angry?  4:5 So jonah
w out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there
mad him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see
what would becom of the city.

4:6 and the lord god prepar a gourd, and made it to come up over
jonah, that it might be a shadow over hi head, to deliv him from
hi grief. So jonah wa exceed glad of the gourd.

4:7 but god prepar a worm when the morn rose the next day, and it
smot the gourd that it withered.

4:8 and it came to pass, when the sun did arise, that god prepar a
veh east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of jonah, that he
fainted, and wish in himself to die, and said, It is better for me
to die than to live.

4:9 and god said to jonah, doest thou well to be angri for the gourd?
and he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death.

4:10 then said the lord, thou hast had piti on the gourd, for the
which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in
a night, and perish in a night: 4:11 and should not I spare nineveh,
that great city, wherein are more then sixscor thousand person that
cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and also
much cattle?




micah


1:1 the word of the lord that came to micah the morasthit in the
day of jotham, ahaz, and hezekiah, king of judah, which he saw
concern samaria and jerusalem.

1:2 hear, all ye people; hearken, O earth, and all that therein is:
and let the lord god be wit against you, the lord from hi holy
temple.

1:3 for, behold, the lord cometh forth out of hi place, and will come
down, and tread upon the high place of the earth.

1:4 and the mountain shall be molten under him, and the valley shall
b cleft, as wax befor the fire, and as the water that are poured
down a steep place.

1:5 for the transgress of jacob is all this, and for the sin of
th hous of israel. what is the transgress of jacob? is it not
samaria? and what are the high place of judah? are they not
jerusalem?  1:6 therefor I will make samaria as an heap of the field,
and as plant of a vineyard: and I will pour down the stones
thereof into the valley, and I will discov the foundat thereof.

1:7 and all the graven imag thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and
al the hire thereof shall be burn with the fire, and all the idols
thereof will I lay desolate: for she gather it of the hire of an
harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot.

1:8 therefor I will wail and howl, I will go strip and naked: i
wil make a wail like the dragons, and mourn as the owls.

1:9 for her wound is incurable; for it is come unto judah; he is come
unto the gate of my people, even to jerusalem.

1:10 declar ye it not at gath, weep ye not at all: in the hous of
aphrah roll thyself in the dust.

1:11 pass ye away, thou inhabit of saphir, have thi shame naked:
th inhabit of zaanan came not forth in the mourn of bethezel;
h shall receiv of you hi standing.

1:12 for the inhabit of maroth wait care for good: but evil
cam down from the lord unto the gate of jerusalem.

1:13 O thou inhabit of lachish, bind the chariot to the swift
beast: she is the begin of the sin to the daughter of zion: for
th transgress of israel were found in thee.

1:14 therefor shalt thou give present to moreshethgath: the houses
of achzib shall be a lie to the king of israel.

1:15 yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabit of mareshah: he
shal come unto adullam the glori of israel.

1:16 make thee bald, and poll thee for thi delic children; enlarge
thi bald as the eagle; for they are gone into captiv from thee.

2:1 woe to them that devis iniquity, and work evil upon their beds!
when the morn is light, they practis it, becaus it is in the
pow of their hand.

2:2 and they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and
tak them away: so they oppress a man and hi house, even a man and
hi heritage.

2:3 therefor thu saith the lord; behold, against thi famili do i
devis an evil, from which ye shall not remov your necks; neither
shal ye go haughtily: for thi time is evil.

2:4 In that day shall one take up a parabl against you, and lament
with a dole lamentation, and say, We be utterli spoiled: he hath
chang the portion of my people: how hath he remov it from me!
turn away he hath divid our fields.

2:5 therefor thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by lot in
th congreg of the lord.

2:6 prophesi ye not, say they to them that prophesy: they shall not
prophesi to them, that they shall not take shame.

2:7 O thou that art name the hous of jacob, is the spirit of the
lord straitened? are these hi doings? do not my word do good to him
that walketh uprightly?  2:8 even of late my peopl is risen up as an
enemy: ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that pass by
secur as men avers from war.

2:9 the women of my peopl have ye cast out from their pleasant
houses; from their children have ye taken away my glori for ever.

2:10 aris ye, and depart; for thi is not your rest: becaus it is
polluted, it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction.

2:11 If a man walk in the spirit and falsehood do lie, saying, i
wil prophesi unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be
th prophet of thi people.

2:12 I will sure assemble, O jacob, all of thee; I will surely
gath the remnant of israel; I will put them togeth as the sheep of
bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their fold: they shall make great
nois by reason of the multitud of men.

2:13 the breaker is come up befor them: they have broken up, and have
pass through the gate, and are gone out by it: and their king shall
pass befor them, and the lord on the head of them.

3:1 and I said, hear, I pray you, O head of jacob, and ye princ of
th hous of israel; Is it not for you to know judgment?  3:2 who hate
th good, and love the evil; who pluck off their skin from off them,
and their flesh from off their bones; 3:3 who also eat the flesh of my
people, and flay their skin from off them; and they break their bones,
and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the
caldron.

3:4 then shall they cri unto the lord, but he will not hear them: he
wil even hide hi face from them at that time, as they have behaved
themselv ill in their doings.

3:5 thu saith the lord concern the prophet that make my people
err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, peace; and he that putteth
not into their mouths, they even prepar war against him.

3:6 therefor night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and
th sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark
ov them.

3:7 then shall the seer be ashamed, and the divin confounded: yea,
they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of god.

3:8 but truli I am full of power by the spirit of the lord, and of
judgment, and of might, to declar unto jacob hi transgression, and
to israel hi sin.

3:9 hear this, I pray you, ye head of the hous of jacob, and princes
of the hous of israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.

3:10 they build up zion with blood, and jerusalem with iniquity.

3:11 the head thereof judg for reward, and the priest thereof teach
for hire, and the prophet thereof divin for money: yet will they
lean upon the lord, and say, Is not the lord among us? none evil can
com upon us.

3:12 therefor shall zion for your sake be plow as a field, and
jerusalem shall becom heaps, and the mountain of the hous as the
high place of the forest.

4:1 but in the last day it shall come to pass, that the mountain of
th hous of the lord shall be establish in the top of the
mountains, and it shall be exalt abov the hills; and peopl shall
flow unto it.

4:2 and mani nation shall come, and say, come, and let us go up to
th mountain of the lord, and to the hous of the god of jacob; and he
wil teach us of hi ways, and we will walk in hi paths: for the law
shal go forth of zion, and the word of the lord from jerusalem.

4:3 and he shall judg among mani people, and rebuk strong nations
afar off; and they shall beat their sword into plowshares, and their
spear into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war ani more.

4:4 but they shall sit everi man under hi vine and under hi fig
tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the lord of
host hath spoken it.

4:5 for all peopl will walk everi one in the name of hi god, and we
wil walk in the name of the lord our god for ever and ever.

4:6 In that day, saith the lord, will I assembl her that halteth, and
i will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted;
4:7 and I will make her that halt a remnant, and her that wa cast
far off a strong nation: and the lord shall reign over them in mount
zion from henceforth, even for ever.

4:8 and thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of
zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom
shal come to the daughter of jerusalem.

4:9 now whi dost thou cri out aloud? is there no king in thee? is thy
counsellor perished? for pang have taken thee as a woman in travail.

4:10 Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O daughter of zion, like a
woman in travail: for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and
thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go even to babylon;
ther shalt thou be delivered; there the lord shall redeem thee from
th hand of thine enemies.

4:11 now also mani nation are gather against thee, that say, let
her be defiled, and let our eye look upon zion.

4:12 but they know not the thought of the lord, neither understand
they hi counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheav into the
floor.

4:13 aris and thresh, O daughter of zion: for I will make thine horn
iron, and I will make thi hoof brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces
mani people: and I will consecr their gain unto the lord, and their
subst unto the lord of the whole earth.

5:1 now gather thyself in troops, O daughter of troops: he hath laid
sieg against us: they shall smite the judg of israel with a rod upon
th cheek.

5:2 but thou, bethlehem ephratah, though thou be littl among the
thousand of judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that
i to be ruler in israel; whose go forth have been from of old,
from everlasting.

5:3 therefor will he give them up, until the time that she which
travaileth hath brought forth: then the remnant of hi brethren shall
return unto the children of israel.

5:4 and he shall stand and feed in the strength of the lord, in the
majesti of the name of the lord hi god; and they shall abide: for now
shal he be great unto the end of the earth.

5:5 and thi man shall be the peace, when the assyrian shall come into
our land: and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise
against him seven shepherds, and eight princip men.

5:6 and they shall wast the land of assyria with the sword, and the
land of nimrod in the entranc thereof: thu shall he deliv us from
th assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth
within our borders.

5:7 and the remnant of jacob shall be in the midst of mani peopl as a
dew from the lord, as the shower upon the grass, that tarrieth not
for man, nor waiteth for the son of men.

5:8 and the remnant of jacob shall be among the gentil in the midst
of mani peopl as a lion among the beast of the forest, as a young
lion among the flock of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth
down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.

5:9 thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries, and all
thin enemi shall be cut off.

5:10 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord, that i
wil cut off thi hors out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy
thi chariots: 5:11 and I will cut off the citi of thi land, and
throw down all thi strong holds: 5:12 and I will cut off witchcrafts
out of thine hand; and thou shalt have no more soothsayers: 5:13 thy
graven imag also will I cut off, and thi stand imag out of the
midst of thee; and thou shalt no more worship the work of thine hands.

5:14 and I will pluck up thi grove out of the midst of thee: so will
i destroy thi cities.

5:15 and I will execut vengeanc in anger and furi upon the heathen,
such as they have not heard.

6:1 hear ye now what the lord saith; arise, contend thou befor the
mountains, and let the hill hear thi voice.

6:2 hear ye, O mountains, the lord' controversy, and ye strong
found of the earth: for the lord hath a controversi with his
people, and he will plead with israel.

6:3 O my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have i
weari thee? testifi against me.

6:4 for I brought thee up out of the land of egypt, and redeem thee
out of the hous of servants; and I sent befor thee moses, aaron, and
miriam.

6:5 O my people, rememb now what balak king of moab consulted, and
what balaam the son of beor answer him from shittim unto gilgal;
that ye may know the righteous of the lord.

6:6 wherewith shall I come befor the lord, and bow myself befor the
high god? shall I come befor him with burnt offerings, with calv of
a year old?  6:7 will the lord be pleas with thousand of rams, or
with ten thousand of river of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression, the fruit of my bodi for the sin of my soul?  6:8 he
hath shew thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbl with
thi god?  6:9 the lord' voic crieth unto the city, and the man of
wisdom shall see thi name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appoint it.

6:10 are there yet the treasur of wicked in the hous of the
wicked, and the scant measur that is abominable?  6:11 shall I count
them pure with the wick balances, and with the bag of deceitful
weights?  6:12 for the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the
inhabit thereof have spoken lies, and their tongu is deceit in
their mouth.

6:13 therefor also will I make thee sick in smite thee, in making
the desol becaus of thi sins.

6:14 thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and thi cast down shall
b in the midst of thee; and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not
deliver; and that which thou deliverest will I give up to the sword.

6:15 thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the
olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but
shalt not drink wine.

6:16 for the statut of omri are kept, and all the work of the house
of ahab, and ye walk in their counsels; that I should make thee a
desolation, and the inhabit thereof an hissing: therefor ye shall
bear the reproach of my people.

7:1 woe is me! for I am as when they have gather the summer fruits,
a the grapeglean of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my
soul desir the firstrip fruit.

7:2 the good man is perish out of the earth: and there is none
upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood; they hunt everi man
hi brother with a net.

7:3 that they may do evil with both hand earnestly, the prince
asketh, and the judg asketh for a reward; and the great man, he
uttereth hi mischiev desire: so they wrap it up.

7:4 the best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper than a
thorn hedge: the day of thi watchmen and thi visit cometh; now
shal be their perplexity.

7:5 trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confid in a guide: keep
th door of thi mouth from her that lieth in thi bosom.

7:6 for the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up
against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a
man' enemi are the men of hi own house.

7:7 therefor I will look unto the lord; I will wait for the god of my
salvation: my god will hear me.

7:8 rejoic not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise;
when I sit in darkness, the lord shall be a light unto me.

7:9 I will bear the indign of the lord, becaus I have sinned
against him, until he plead my cause, and execut judgment for me: he
wil bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness.

7:10 then she that is mine enemi shall see it, and shame shall cover
h which said unto me, where is the lord thi god? mine eye shall
behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.

7:11 In the day that thi wall are to be built, in that day shall the
decre be far removed.

7:12 In that day also he shall come even to thee from assyria, and
from the fortifi cities, and from the fortress even to the river,
and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.

7:13 notwithstand the land shall be desol becaus of them that
dwel therein, for the fruit of their doings.

7:14 feed thi peopl with thi rod, the flock of thine heritage, which
dwel solitarili in the wood, in the midst of carmel: let them feed in
bashan and gilead, as in the day of old.

7:15 accord to the day of thi come out of the land of egypt will
i shew unto him marvel things.

7:16 the nation shall see and be confound at all their might: they
shal lay their hand upon their mouth, their ear shall be deaf.

7:17 they shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of
their hole like worm of the earth: they shall be afraid of the lord
our god, and shall fear becaus of thee.

7:18 who is a god like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth
bi the transgress of the remnant of hi heritage? he retaineth not
hi anger for ever, becaus he delighteth in mercy.

7:19 He will turn again, he will have compass upon us; he will
subdu our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sin into the
depth of the sea.

7:20 thou wilt perform the truth to jacob, and the merci to abraham,
which thou hast sworn unto our father from the day of old.




nahum


1:1 the burden of nineveh. the book of the vision of nahum the elkoshite.

1:2 god is jealous, and the lord revengeth; the lord revengeth, and is
furious; the lord will take vengeanc on hi adversaries, and he
reserveth wrath for hi enemies.

1:3 the lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all
acquit the wicked: the lord hath hi way in the whirlwind and in the
storm, and the cloud are the dust of hi feet.

1:4 He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the
rivers: bashan languisheth, and carmel, and the flower of lebanon
languisheth.

1:5 the mountain quak at him, and the hill melt, and the earth is
burn at hi presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.

1:6 who can stand befor hi indignation? and who can abid in the
fierc of hi anger? hi furi is pour out like fire, and the
rock are thrown down by him.

1:7 the lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he
knoweth them that trust in him.

1:8 but with an overrun flood he will make an utter end of the
plac thereof, and dark shall pursu hi enemies.

1:9 what do ye imagin against the lord? he will make an utter end:
afflict shall not rise up the second time.

1:10 for while they be folden togeth as thorns, and while they are
drunken as drunkards, they shall be devour as stubbl fulli dry.

1:11 there is one come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the
lord, a wick counsellor.

1:12 thu saith the lord; though they be quiet, and likewis many, yet
thu shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. though I have
afflict thee, I will afflict thee no more.

1:13 for now will I break hi yoke from off thee, and will burst thy
bond in sunder.

1:14 and the lord hath given a command concern thee, that no
mor of thi name be sown: out of the hous of thi god will I cut off
th graven imag and the molten image: I will make thi grave; for thou
art vile.

1:15 behold upon the mountain the feet of him that bringeth good
tidings, that publisheth peace! O judah, keep thi solemn feasts,
perform thi vows: for the wick shall no more pass through thee; he
i utterli cut off.

2:1 He that dasheth in piec is come up befor thi face: keep the
munition, watch the way, make thi loin strong, fortifi thi power
mightily.

2:2 for the lord hath turn away the excel of jacob, as the
excel of israel: for the emptier have empti them out, and
mar their vine branches.

2:3 the shield of hi mighti men is made red, the valiant men are in
scarlet: the chariot shall be with flame torch in the day of his
preparation, and the fir tree shall be terribl shaken.

2:4 the chariot shall rage in the streets, they shall justl one
against anoth in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they
shal run like the lightnings.

2:5 He shall recount hi worthies: they shall stumbl in their walk;
they shall make hast to the wall thereof, and the defenc shall be
prepared.

2:6 the gate of the river shall be opened, and the palac shall be
dissolved.

2:7 and huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and
her maid shall lead her as with the voic of doves, taber upon
their breasts.

2:8 but nineveh is of old like a pool of water: yet they shall flee
away.

stand, stand, shall they cry; but none shall look back.

2:9 take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for there is
non end of the store and glori out of all the pleasant furniture.

2:10 she is empty, and void, and waste: and the heart melteth, and the
kne smite together, and much pain is in all loins, and the face of
them all gather blackness.

2:11 where is the dwell of the lions, and the feedingplac of the
young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion's
whelp, and none made them afraid?  2:12 the lion did tear in pieces
enough for hi whelps, and strangl for hi lionesses, and fill his
hol with prey, and hi den with ravin.

2:13 behold, I am against thee, saith the lord of hosts, and I will
burn her chariot in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thi young
lions: and I will cut off thi prey from the earth, and the voic of
thi messeng shall no more be heard.

3:1 woe to the bloodi city! it is all full of lie and robbery; the
prey departeth not; 3:2 the nois of a whip, and the nois of the
rattl of the wheels, and of the prans horses, and of the jumping
chariots.

3:3 the horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the glittering
spear: and there is a multitud of slain, and a great number of
carcases; and there is none end of their corpses; they stumbl upon
their corpses: 3:4 becaus of the multitud of the whoredom of the
wellfavour harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations
through her whoredoms, and famili through her witchcrafts.

3:5 behold, I am against thee, saith the lord of hosts; and I will
discov thi skirt upon thi face, and I will shew the nation thy
nakedness, and the kingdom thi shame.

3:6 and I will cast abomin filth upon thee, and make thee vile,
and will set thee as a gazingstock.

3:7 and it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee shall
fle from thee, and say, nineveh is laid waste: who will bemoan her?
whenc shall I seek comfort for thee?  3:8 art thou better than
popul no, that wa situat among the rivers, that had the waters
round about it, whose rampart wa the sea, and her wall wa from the
sea?  3:9 ethiopia and egypt were her strength, and it wa infinite;
put and lubim were thi helpers.

3:10 yet wa she carri away, she went into captivity: her young
children also were dash in piec at the top of all the streets: and
they cast lot for her honour men, and all her great men were
bound in chains.

3:11 thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt
seek strength becaus of the enemy.

3:12 all thi strong hold shall be like fig tree with the firstripe
figs: if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the
eater.

3:13 behold, thi peopl in the midst of thee are women: the gate of
thi land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies: the fire shall
devour thi bars.

3:14 draw thee water for the siege, fortifi thi strong holds: go into
clay, and tread the morter, make strong the brickkiln.

3:15 there shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off,
it shall eat thee up like the cankerworm: make thyself mani as the
cankerworm, make thyself mani as the locusts.

3:16 thou hast multipli thi merchant abov the star of heaven: the
cankerworm spoileth, and fleeth away.

3:17 thi crown are as the locusts, and thi captain as the great
grasshoppers, which camp in the hedg in the cold day, but when the
sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they
are.

3:18 thi shepherd slumber, O king of assyria: thi nobl shall dwell
in the dust: thi peopl is scatter upon the mountains, and no man
gathereth them.

3:19 there is no heal of thi bruise; thi wound is grievous: all
that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hand over thee: for upon
whom hath not thi wicked pass continually?




habakkuk


1:1 the burden which habakkuk the prophet did see.

1:2 O lord, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear! even cri out
unto thee of violence, and thou wilt not save!  1:3 whi dost thou shew
m iniquity, and caus me to behold grievance? for spoil and
viol are befor me: and there are that rais up strife and
contention.

1:4 therefor the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth:
for the wick doth compass about the righteous; therefor wrong
judg proceedeth.

1:5 behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously:
for I will work a work in your day which ye will not believe, though
it be told you.

1:6 for, lo, I rais up the chaldeans, that bitter and hasti nation,
which shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess the
dwellingplac that are not their's.

1:7 they are terribl and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity
shal proceed of themselves.

1:8 their hors also are swifter than the leopards, and are more
fierc than the even wolves: and their horsemen shall spread
themselves, and their horsemen shall come from far; they shall fli as
th eagl that hasteth to eat.

1:9 they shall come all for violence: their face shall sup up as the
east wind, and they shall gather the captiv as the sand.

1:10 and they shall scoff at the kings, and the princ shall be a
scorn unto them: they shall derid everi strong hold; for they shall
heap dust, and take it.

1:11 then shall hi mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend,
imput thi hi power unto hi god.

1:12 art thou not from everlasting, O lord my god, mine holi one? we
shal not die. O lord, thou hast ordain them for judgment; and, o
mighti god, thou hast establish them for correction.

1:13 thou art of purer eye than to behold evil, and canst not look on
iniquity: wherefor lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously,
and holdest thi tongu when the wick devoureth the man that is more
right than he?  1:14 and makest men as the fish of the sea, as
th creep things, that have no ruler over them?  1:15 they take up
al of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather
them in their drag: therefor they rejoic and are glad.

1:16 therefor they sacrific unto their net, and burn incens unto
their drag; becaus by them their portion is fat, and their meat
plenteous.

1:17 shall they therefor empti their net, and not spare continually
to slay the nations?  2:1 I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon
th tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what i
shal answer when I am reproved.

2:2 and the lord answer me, and said, write the vision, and make it
plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it.

2:3 for the vision is yet for an appoint time, but at the end it
shal speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; becaus it
wil sure come, it will not tarry.

2:4 behold, hi soul which is lift up is not upright in him: but the
just shall live by hi faith.

2:5 yea also, becaus he transgresseth by wine, he is a proud man,
neith keepeth at home, who enlargeth hi desir as hell, and is as
death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations,
and heapeth unto him all people: 2:6 shall not all these take up a
par against him, and a taunt proverb against him, and say, woe
to him that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and to him
that ladeth himself with thick clay!  2:7 shall they not rise up
suddenli that shall bite thee, and awak that shall vex thee, and thou
shalt be for booti unto them?  2:8 becaus thou hast spoil many
nations, all the remnant of the peopl shall spoil thee; becaus of
men' blood, and for the violenc of the land, of the city, and of all
that dwell therein.

2:9 woe to him that coveteth an evil covet to hi house, that
h may set hi nest on high, that he may be deliv from the power
of evil!  2:10 thou hast consult shame to thi hous by cut off
mani people, and hast sin against thi soul.

2:11 for the stone shall cri out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timb shall answer it.

2:12 woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a
citi by iniquity!  2:13 behold, is it not of the lord of host that
th peopl shall labour in the veri fire, and the peopl shall weary
themselv for veri vanity?  2:14 for the earth shall be fill with
th knowledg of the glori of the lord, as the water cover the sea.

2:15 woe unto him that giveth hi neighbour drink, that puttest thy
bottl to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest look on
their nakedness!  2:16 thou art fill with shame for glory: drink
thou also, and let thi foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the lord's
right hand shall be turn unto thee, and shame spew shall be on
thi glory.

2:17 for the violenc of lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of
beasts, which made them afraid, becaus of men' blood, and for the
viol of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.

2:18 what profiteth the graven imag that the maker thereof hath
graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of
hi work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?  2:19 woe unto him that
saith to the wood, awake; to the dumb stone, arise, it shall teach!
behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath
at all in the midst of it.

2:20 but the lord is in hi holi temple: let all the earth keep
sil befor him.

3:1 A prayer of habakkuk the prophet upon shigionoth.

3:2 O lord, I have heard thi speech, and wa afraid: O lord, revive
thi work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the year make
known; in wrath rememb mercy.

3:3 god came from teman, and the holi one from mount paran. selah. his
glori cover the heavens, and the earth wa full of hi praise.

3:4 and hi bright wa as the light; he had horn come out of
hi hand: and there wa the hide of hi power.

3:5 befor him went the pestilence, and burn coal went forth at
hi feet.

3:6 He stood, and measur the earth: he beheld, and drove asund the
nations; and the everlast mountain were scattered, the perpetual
hil did bow: hi way are everlasting.

3:7 I saw the tent of cushan in affliction: and the curtain of the
land of midian did tremble.

3:8 wa the lord displeas against the rivers? wa thine anger
against the rivers? wa thi wrath against the sea, that thou didst
rid upon thine hors and thi chariot of salvation?  3:9 thi bow was
mad quit naked, accord to the oath of the tribes, even thi word.
selah. thou didst cleav the earth with rivers.

3:10 the mountain saw thee, and they trembled: the overflow of the
wat pass by: the deep utter hi voice, and lift up hi hands
on high.

3:11 the sun and moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of
thin arrow they went, and at the shine of thi glitter spear.

3:12 thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst
thresh the heathen in anger.

3:13 thou wentest forth for the salvat of thi people, even for
salv with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the
hous of the wicked, by discov the foundat unto the neck.
selah.

3:14 thou didst strike through with hi stave the head of his
villages: they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing
wa as to devour the poor secretly.

3:15 thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, through the
heap of great waters.

3:16 when I heard, my belli trembled; my lip quiver at the voice:
rotten enter into my bones, and I trembl in myself, that i
might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people,
h will invad them with hi troops.

3:17 although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be
in the vines; the labour of the oliv shall fail, and the field shall
yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there
shal be no herd in the stalls: 3:18 yet I will rejoic in the lord, i
wil joy in the god of my salvation.

3:19 the lord god is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds'
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief
sing on my string instruments.




zephaniah


1:1 the word of the lord which came unto zephaniah the son of cushi,
th son of gedaliah, the son of amariah, the son of hizkiah, in the
day of josiah the son of amon, king of judah.

1:2 I will utterli consum all thing from off the land, saith the
lord.

1:3 I will consum man and beast; I will consum the fowl of the
heaven, and the fish of the sea, and the stumbl block with the
wicked: and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the lord.

1:4 I will also stretch out mine hand upon judah, and upon all the
inhabit of jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of baal from
thi place, and the name of the chemarim with the priests; 1:5 and
them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that
worship and that swear by the lord, and that swear by malcham; 1:6 and
them that are turn back from the lord; and those that have not
sought the lord, nor enquir for him.

1:7 hold thi peac at the presenc of the lord god: for the day of the
lord is at hand: for the lord hath prepar a sacrifice, he hath bid
hi guests.

1:8 and it shall come to pass in the day of the lord' sacrifice, that
i will punish the princes, and the king' children, and all such as
ar cloth with strang apparel.

1:9 In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the
threshold, which fill their masters' hous with violenc and deceit.

1:10 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord, that there
shal be the nois of a cri from the fish gate, and an howl from
th second, and a great crash from the hills.

1:11 howl, ye inhabit of maktesh, for all the merchant peopl are
cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.

1:12 and it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search
jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settl on their
lees: that say in their heart, the lord will not do good, neither will
h do evil.

1:13 therefor their good shall becom a booty, and their hous a
desolation: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and
they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.

1:14 the great day of the lord is near, it is near, and hasteth
greatly, even the voic of the day of the lord: the mighti man shall
cri there bitterly.

1:15 that day is a day of wrath, a day of troubl and distress, a day
of wast and desolation, a day of dark and gloominess, a day
of cloud and thick darkness, 1:16 A day of the trumpet and alarm
against the fenc cities, and against the high towers.

1:17 and I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like
blind men, becaus they have sin against the lord: and their blood
shal be pour out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.

1:18 neither their silver nor their gold shall be abl to deliv them
in the day of the lord' wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured
bi the fire of hi jealousy: for he shall make even a speedi riddance
of all them that dwell in the land.

2:1 gather yourselv together, yea, gather together, O nation not
desired; 2:2 befor the decre bring forth, befor the day pass as the
chaff, befor the fierc anger of the lord come upon you, befor the
day of the lord' anger come upon you.

2:3 seek ye the lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid
in the day of the lord' anger.

2:4 for gaza shall be forsaken, and ashkelon a desolation: they shall
driv out ashdod at the noon day, and ekron shall be root up.

2:5 woe unto the inhabit of the sea coast, the nation of the
cherethites! the word of the lord is against you; O canaan, the land
of the philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no
inhabitant.

2:6 and the sea coast shall be dwell and cottag for shepherds,
and fold for flocks.

2:7 and the coast shall be for the remnant of the hous of judah; they
shal feed thereupon: in the hous of ashkelon shall they lie down in
th evening: for the lord their god shall visit them, and turn away
their captivity.

2:8 I have heard the reproach of moab, and the revil of the
children of ammon, wherebi they have reproach my people, and
magnifi themselv against their border.

2:9 therefor as I live, saith the lord of hosts, the god of israel,
sur moab shall be as sodom, and the children of ammon as gomorrah,
even the breed of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual
desolation: the residu of my peopl shall spoil them, and the remnant
of my peopl shall possess them.

2:10 thi shall they have for their pride, becaus they have
reproach and magnifi themselv against the peopl of the lord of
hosts.

2:11 the lord will be terribl unto them: for he will famish all the
god of the earth; and men shall worship him, everi one from his
place, even all the isl of the heathen.

2:12 Ye ethiopian also, ye shall be slain by my sword.

2:13 and he will stretch out hi hand against the north, and destroy
assyria; and will make nineveh a desolation, and dri like a
wilderness.

2:14 and flock shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beast of
th nations: both the cormor and the bittern shall lodg in the
upp lintel of it; their voic shall sing in the windows; desolation
shal be in the thresholds; for he shall uncov the cedar work.

2:15 thi is the rejoic citi that dwelt carelessly, that said in
her heart, I am, and there is none besid me: how is she becom a
desolation, a place for beast to lie down in! everi one that passeth
bi her shall hiss, and wag hi hand.

3:1 woe to her that is filthi and polluted, to the oppress city!
3:2 she obey not the voice; she receiv not correction; she trusted
not in the lord; she drew not near to her god.

3:3 her princ within her are roar lions; her judg are evening
wolves; they gnaw not the bone till the morrow.

3:4 her prophet are light and treacher persons: her priest have
pollut the sanctuary, they have done violenc to the law.

3:5 the just lord is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity:
everi morn doth he bring hi judgment to light, he faileth not; but
th unjust knoweth no shame.

3:6 I have cut off the nations: their tower are desolate; I made
their street waste, that none passeth by: their citi are destroyed,
so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant.

3:7 I said, sure thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receiv instruction;
so their dwell should not be cut off, howsoev I punish them:
but they rose early, and corrupt all their doings.

3:8 therefor wait ye upon me, saith the lord, until the day that i
ris up to the prey: for my determin is to gather the nations,
that I may assembl the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation,
even all my fierc anger: for all the earth shall be devour with the
fir of my jealousy.

3:9 for then will I turn to the peopl a pure language, that they may
al call upon the name of the lord, to serv him with one consent.

3:10 from beyond the river of ethiopia my suppliants, even the
daught of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.

3:11 In that day shalt thou not be asham for all thi doings, wherein
th hast transgress against me: for then I will take away out of
th midst of thee them that rejoic in thi pride, and thou shalt no
mor be haughti becaus of my holi mountain.

3:12 I will also leav in the midst of thee an afflict and poor
people, and they shall trust in the name of the lord.

3:13 the remnant of israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies;
neith shall a deceit tongu be found in their mouth: for they
shal feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

3:14 sing, O daughter of zion; shout, O israel; be glad and rejoice
with all the heart, O daughter of jerusalem.

3:15 the lord hath taken away thi judgments, he hath cast out thine
enemy: the king of israel, even the lord, is in the midst of thee:
thou shalt not see evil ani more.

3:16 In that day it shall be said to jerusalem, fear thou not: and to
zion, let not thine hand be slack.

3:17 the lord thi god in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he
wil rejoic over thee with joy; he will rest in hi love, he will joy
ov thee with singing.

3:18 I will gather them that are sorrow for the solemn assembly,
who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it wa a burden.

3:19 behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee: and i
wil save her that halteth, and gather her that wa driven out; and i
wil get them prais and fame in everi land where they have been put
to shame.

3:20 At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that i
gath you: for I will make you a name and a prais among all people
of the earth, when I turn back your captiv befor your eyes,
saith the lord.




haggai


1:1 In the second year of dariu the king, in the sixth month, in the
first day of the month, came the word of the lord by haggai the
prophet unto zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, governor of judah, and
to joshua the son of josedech, the high priest, saying, 1:2 thus
speaketh the lord of hosts, saying, thi peopl say, the time is not
come, the time that the lord' hous should be built.

1:3 then came the word of the lord by haggai the prophet, saying, 1:4
i it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your ciel houses, and this
hous lie waste?  1:5 now therefor thu saith the lord of hosts;
consid your ways.

1:6 Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not
enough; ye drink, but ye are not fill with drink; ye cloth you, but
ther is none warm; and he that earneth wage earneth wage to put it
into a bag with holes.

1:7 thu saith the lord of hosts; consid your ways.

1:8 Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and i
wil take pleasur in it, and I will be glorified, saith the lord.

1:9 Ye look for much, and, lo it came to little; and when ye brought
it home, I did blow upon it. why? saith the lord of hosts. becaus of
min hous that is waste, and ye run everi man unto hi own house.

1:10 therefor the heaven over you is stay from dew, and the earth
i stay from her fruit.

1:11 and I call for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains,
and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon
that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle,
and upon all the labour of the hands.

1:12 then zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, and joshua the son of
josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed
th voic of the lord their god, and the word of haggai the prophet,
a the lord their god had sent him, and the peopl did fear befor the
lord.

1:13 then spake haggai the lord' messeng in the lord' messag unto
th people, saying, I am with you, saith the lord.

1:14 and the lord stir up the spirit of zerubbabel the son of
shealtiel, governor of judah, and the spirit of joshua the son of
josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the
people; and they came and did work in the hous of the lord of hosts,
their god, 1:15 In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in
th second year of dariu the king.

2:1 In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month,
cam the word of the lord by the prophet haggai, saying, 2:2 speak now
to zerubbabel the son of shealtiel, governor of judah, and to joshua
th son of josedech, the high priest, and to the residu of the
people, saying, 2:3 who is left among you that saw thi hous in her
first glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eye in
comparison of it as nothing?  2:4 yet now be strong, O zerubbabel,
saith the lord; and be strong, O joshua, son of josedech, the high
priest; and be strong, all ye peopl of the land, saith the lord, and
work: for I am with you, saith the lord of hosts: 2:5 accord to the
word that I coven with you when ye came out of egypt, so my
spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not.

2:6 for thu saith the lord of hosts; yet once, it is a littl while,
and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry
land; 2:7 and I will shake all nations, and the desir of all nations
shal come: and I will fill thi hous with glory, saith the lord of
hosts.

2:8 the silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the lord of hosts.

2:9 the glori of thi latter hous shall be greater than of the
former, saith the lord of hosts: and in thi place will I give peace,
saith the lord of hosts.

2:10 In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second
year of darius, came the word of the lord by haggai the prophet,
saying, 2:11 thu saith the lord of hosts; ask now the priests
concern the law, saying, 2:12 If one bear holi flesh in the skirt
of hi garment, and with hi skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or
wine, or oil, or ani meat, shall it be holy? and the priest answered
and said, no.

2:13 then said haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead bodi touch any
of these, shall it be unclean? and the priest answer and said, it
shal be unclean.

2:14 then answer haggai, and said, So is thi people, and so is this
nat befor me, saith the lord; and so is everi work of their hands;
and that which they offer there is unclean.

2:15 and now, I pray you, consid from thi day and upward, from
befor a stone wa laid upon a stone in the templ of the lord: 2:16
sinc those day were, when one came to an heap of twenti measures,
ther were but ten: when one came to the pressfat for to draw out
fifti vessel out of the press, there were but twenty.

2:17 I smote you with blast and with mildew and with hail in all
th labour of your hands; yet ye turn not to me, saith the lord.

2:18 consid now from thi day and upward, from the four and
twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the
found of the lord' templ wa laid, consid it.

2:19 Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine, and the fig
tree, and the pomegranate, and the oliv tree, hath not brought forth:
from thi day will I bless you.

2:20 and again the word of the lord came unto haggai in the four and
twentieth day of the month, saying, 2:21 speak to zerubbabel, governor
of judah, saying, I will shake the heaven and the earth; 2:22 and i
wil overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength
of the kingdom of the heathen; and I will overthrow the chariots, and
thos that ride in them; and the hors and their rider shall come
down, everi one by the sword of hi brother.

2:23 In that day, saith the lord of hosts, will I take thee, o
zerubbabel, my servant, the son of shealtiel, saith the lord, and will
mak thee as a signet: for I have chosen thee, saith the lord of hosts.




zechariah


1:1 In the eighth month, in the second year of darius, came the word
of the lord unto zechariah, the son of berechiah, the son of iddo the
prophet, saying, 1:2 the lord hath been sore displeas with your
fathers.

1:3 therefor say thou unto them, thu saith the lord of hosts; turn
y unto me, saith the lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith
th lord of hosts.

1:4 Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophet have
cried, saying, thu saith the lord of hosts; turn ye now from your
evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor
hearken unto me, saith the lord.

1:5 your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for
ever?  1:6 but my word and my statutes, which I command my servants
th prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they
return and said, like as the lord of host thought to do unto us,
accord to our ways, and accord to our doings, so hath he dealt
with us.

1:7 upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is
th month sebat, in the second year of darius, came the word of the
lord unto zechariah, the son of berechiah, the son of iddo the
prophet, saying, 1:8 I saw by night, and behold a man ride upon a
r horse, and he stood among the myrtl tree that were in the
bottom; and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white.

1:9 then said I, O my lord, what are these? and the angel that talked
with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be.

1:10 and the man that stood among the myrtl tree answer and said,
thes are they whom the lord hath sent to walk to and fro through the
earth.

1:11 and they answer the angel of the lord that stood among the
myrtl trees, and said, We have walk to and fro through the earth,
and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest.

1:12 then the angel of the lord answer and said, O lord of hosts,
how long wilt thou not have merci on jerusalem and on the citi of
judah, against which thou hast had indign these threescor and
ten years?  1:13 and the lord answer the angel that talk with me
with good word and comfort words.

1:14 So the angel that commun with me said unto me, cri thou,
saying, thu saith the lord of hosts; I am jealou for jerusalem and
for zion with a great jealousy.

1:15 and I am veri sore displeas with the heathen that are at ease:
for I wa but a littl displeased, and they help forward the
affliction.

1:16 therefor thu saith the lord; I am return to jerusalem with
mercies: my hous shall be built in it, saith the lord of hosts, and a
lin shall be stretch forth upon jerusalem.

1:17 cri yet, saying, thu saith the lord of hosts; My citi through
prosper shall yet be spread abroad; and the lord shall yet comfort
zion, and shall yet choos jerusalem.

1:18 then lift I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns.

1:19 and I said unto the angel that talk with me, what be these? and
h answer me, these are the horn which have scatter judah,
israel, and jerusalem.

1:20 and the lord shew me four carpenters.

1:21 then said I, what come these to do? and he spake, saying, these
ar the horn which have scatter judah, so that no man did lift up
hi head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horn of
th gentiles, which lift up their horn over the land of judah to
scatt it.

2:1 I lift up mine eye again, and looked, and behold a man with a
measur line in hi hand.

2:2 then said I, whither goest thou? and he said unto me, To measure
jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length
thereof.

2:3 and, behold, the angel that talk with me went forth, and another
angel went out to meet him, 2:4 and said unto him, run, speak to this
young man, saying, jerusalem shall be inhabit as town without walls
for the multitud of men and cattl therein: 2:5 for I, saith the
lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the
glori in the midst of her.

2:6 ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the north, saith the
lord: for I have spread you abroad as the four wind of the heaven,
saith the lord.

2:7 deliv thyself, O zion, that dwellest with the daughter of
babylon.

2:8 for thu saith the lord of hosts; after the glori hath he sent me
unto the nation which spoil you: for he that toucheth you toucheth
th appl of hi eye.

2:9 for, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a
spoil to their servants: and ye shall know that the lord of host hath
sent me.

2:10 sing and rejoice, O daughter of zion: for, lo, I come, and I will
dwel in the midst of thee, saith the lord.

2:11 and mani nation shall be join to the lord in that day, and
shal be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou
shalt know that the lord of host hath sent me unto thee.

2:12 and the lord shall inherit judah hi portion in the holi land,
and shall choos jerusalem again.

2:13 Be silent, O all flesh, befor the lord: for he is rais up out
of hi holi habitation.

3:1 and he shew me joshua the high priest stand befor the angel
of the lord, and satan stand at hi right hand to resist him.

3:2 and the lord said unto satan, the lord rebuk thee, O satan; even
th lord that hath chosen jerusalem rebuk thee: is not thi a brand
pluck out of the fire?  3:3 now joshua wa cloth with filthy
garments, and stood befor the angel.

3:4 and he answer and spake unto those that stood befor him,
saying, take away the filthi garment from him. and unto him he said,
behold, I have caus thine iniqu to pass from thee, and I will
cloth thee with chang of raiment.

3:5 and I said, let them set a fair mitr upon hi head. So they set a
fair mitr upon hi head, and cloth him with garments. and the angel
of the lord stood by.

3:6 and the angel of the lord protest unto joshua, saying, 3:7 thus
saith the lord of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou
wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judg my house, and shalt
also keep my courts, and I will give thee place to walk among these
that stand by.

3:8 hear now, O joshua the high priest, thou, and thi fellow that sit
befor thee: for they are men wonder at: for, behold, I will bring
forth my servant the branch.

3:9 for behold the stone that I have laid befor joshua; upon one
ston shall be seven eyes: behold, I will engrav the grave thereof,
saith the lord of hosts, and I will remov the iniqu of that land
in one day.

3:10 In that day, saith the lord of hosts, shall ye call everi man his
neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.

4:1 and the angel that talk with me came again, and wake me, as a
man that is waken out of hi sleep.

4:2 and said unto me, what seest thou? and I said, I have looked, and
behold a candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and
hi seven lamp thereon, and seven pipe to the seven lamps, which are
upon the top thereof: 4:3 and two oliv tree by it, one upon the
right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof.

4:4 So I answer and spake to the angel that talk with me, saying,
what are these, my lord?  4:5 then the angel that talk with me
answ and said unto me, knowest thou not what these be? and I said,
no, my lord.

4:6 then he answer and spake unto me, saying, thi is the word of
th lord unto zerubbabel, saying, not by might, nor by power, but by
mi spirit, saith the lord of hosts.

4:7 who art thou, O great mountain? befor zerubbabel thou shalt
becom a plain: and he shall bring forth the headston thereof with
shoutings, crying, grace, grace unto it.

4:8 moreov the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 4:9 the hands
of zerubbabel have laid the foundat of thi house; hi hand shall
also finish it; and thou shalt know that the lord of host hath sent
m unto you.

4:10 for who hath despis the day of small things? for they shall
rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of zerubbabel with
thos seven; they are the eye of the lord, which run to and fro
through the whole earth.

4:11 then answer I, and said unto him, what are these two olive
tre upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side
thereof?  4:12 and I answer again, and said unto him, what be these
two oliv branch which through the two golden pipe empti the golden
oil out of themselves?  4:13 and he answer me and said, knowest thou
not what these be? and I said, no, my lord.

4:14 then said he, these are the two anoint ones, that stand by the
lord of the whole earth.

5:1 then I turned, and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a
fli roll.

5:2 and he said unto me, what seest thou? and I answered, I see a
fli roll; the length thereof is twenti cubits, and the breadth
thereof ten cubits.

5:3 then said he unto me, thi is the curs that goeth forth over the
fac of the whole earth: for everi one that stealeth shall be cut off
a on thi side accord to it; and everi one that sweareth shall be
cut off as on that side accord to it.

5:4 I will bring it forth, saith the lord of hosts, and it shall enter
into the hous of the thief, and into the hous of him that sweareth
fals by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of hi house, and
shal consum it with the timber thereof and the stone thereof.

5:5 then the angel that talk with me went forth, and said unto me,
lift up now thine eyes, and see what is thi that goeth forth.

5:6 and I said, what is it? and he said, thi is an ephah that goeth
forth. He said moreover, thi is their resembl through all the
earth.

5:7 and, behold, there wa lift up a talent of lead: and thi is a
woman that sitteth in the midst of the ephah.

5:8 and he said, thi is wickedness. and he cast it into the midst of
th ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.

5:9 then lift I up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came
out two women, and the wind wa in their wings; for they had wings
lik the wing of a stork: and they lift up the ephah between the
earth and the heaven.

5:10 then said I to the angel that talk with me, whither do these
bear the ephah?  5:11 and he said unto me, To build it an hous in the
land of shinar: and it shall be established, and set there upon her
own base.

6:1 and I turned, and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold,
ther came four chariot out from between two mountains; and the
mountain were mountain of brass.

6:2 In the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot
black horses; 6:3 and in the third chariot white horses; and in the
fourth chariot grisl and bay horses.

6:4 then I answer and said unto the angel that talk with me, what
ar these, my lord?  6:5 and the angel answer and said unto me,
thes are the four spirit of the heavens, which go forth from
stand befor the lord of all the earth.

6:6 the black hors which are therein go forth into the north
country; and the white go forth after them; and the grisl go forth
toward the south country.

6:7 and the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to
and fro through the earth: and he said, get you hence, walk to and fro
through the earth. So they walk to and fro through the earth.

6:8 then cri he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, behold, these
that go toward the north countri have quiet my spirit in the north
country.

6:9 and the word of the lord came unto me, saying, 6:10 take of them
of the captivity, even of heldai, of tobijah, and of jedaiah, which
ar come from babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the
hous of josiah the son of zephaniah; 6:11 then take silver and gold,
and make crowns, and set them upon the head of joshua the son of
josedech, the high priest; 6:12 and speak unto him, saying, thus
speaketh the lord of hosts, saying, behold the man whose name is the
branch; and he shall grow up out of hi place, and he shall build the
templ of the lord: 6:13 even he shall build the templ of the lord;
and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon hi throne;
and he shall be a priest upon hi throne: and the counsel of peace
shal be between them both.

6:14 and the crown shall be to helem, and to tobijah, and to jedaiah,
and to hen the son of zephaniah, for a memori in the templ of the
lord.

6:15 and they that are far off shall come and build in the templ of
th lord, and ye shall know that the lord of host hath sent me unto
you. and thi shall come to pass, if ye will dilig obey the voice
of the lord your god.

7:1 and it came to pass in the fourth year of king darius, that the
word of the lord came unto zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth
month, even in chisleu; 7:2 when they had sent unto the hous of god
sherez and regemmelech, and their men, to pray befor the lord, 7:3
and to speak unto the priest which were in the hous of the lord of
hosts, and to the prophets, saying, should I weep in the fifth month,
separ myself, as I have done these so mani years?  7:4 then came
th word of the lord of host unto me, saying, 7:5 speak unto all the
peopl of the land, and to the priests, saying, when ye fast and
mourn in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventi years, did
y at all fast unto me, even to me?  7:6 and when ye did eat, and when
y did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?
7:7 should ye not hear the word which the lord hath cri by the
form prophets, when jerusalem wa inhabit and in prosperity, and
th citi thereof round about her, when men inhabit the south and
th plain?  7:8 and the word of the lord came unto zechariah, saying,
7:9 thu speaketh the lord of hosts, saying, execut true judgment,
and shew merci and compass everi man to hi brother: 7:10 and
oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor;
and let none of you imagin evil against hi brother in your heart.

7:11 but they refus to hearken, and pull away the shoulder, and
stop their ears, that they should not hear.

7:12 yea, they made their heart as an adam stone, lest they should
hear the law, and the word which the lord of host hath sent in his
spirit by the former prophets: therefor came a great wrath from the
lord of hosts.

7:13 therefor it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would
not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the lord of
hosts: 7:14 but I scatter them with a whirlwind among all the
nat whom they knew not. thu the land wa desol after them,
that no man pass through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant
land desolate.

8:1 again the word of the lord of host came to me, saying, 8:2 thus
saith the lord of hosts; I wa jealou for zion with great jealousy,
and I wa jealou for her with great fury.

8:3 thu saith the lord; I am return unto zion, and will dwell in
th midst of jerusalem: and jerusalem shall be call a citi of truth;
and the mountain of the lord of host the holi mountain.

8:4 thu saith the lord of hosts; there shall yet old men and old
women dwell in the street of jerusalem, and everi man with hi staff
in hi hand for veri age.

8:5 and the street of the citi shall be full of boy and girls
play in the street thereof.

8:6 thu saith the lord of hosts; If it be marvel in the eye of
th remnant of thi peopl in these days, should it also be marvellous
in mine eyes? saith the lord of hosts.

8:7 thu saith the lord of hosts; behold, I will save my peopl from
th east country, and from the west country; 8:8 and I will bring
them, and they shall dwell in the midst of jerusalem: and they shall
b my people, and I will be their god, in truth and in righteousness.

8:9 thu saith the lord of hosts; let your hand be strong, ye that
hear in these day these word by the mouth of the prophets, which
wer in the day that the foundat of the hous of the lord of hosts
wa laid, that the templ might be built.

8:10 for befor these day there wa no hire for man, nor ani hire for
beast; neither wa there ani peac to him that went out or came in
becaus of the affliction: for I set all men everi one against his
neighbour.

8:11 but now I will not be unto the residu of thi peopl as in the
form days, saith the lord of hosts.

8:12 for the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit,
and the ground shall give her increase, and the heaven shall give
their dew; and I will caus the remnant of thi peopl to possess all
thes things.

8:13 and it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curs among the
heathen, O hous of judah, and hous of israel; so will I save you,
and ye shall be a blessing: fear not, but let your hand be strong.

8:14 for thu saith the lord of hosts; As I thought to punish you,
when your father provok me to wrath, saith the lord of hosts, and i
rep not: 8:15 So again have I thought in these day to do well
unto jerusalem and to the hous of judah: fear ye not.

8:16 these are the thing that ye shall do; speak ye everi man the
truth to hi neighbour; execut the judgment of truth and peac in
your gates: 8:17 and let none of you imagin evil in your hearts
against hi neighbour; and love no fals oath: for all these are
th that I hate, saith the lord.

8:18 and the word of the lord of host came unto me, saying, 8:19 thus
saith the lord of hosts; the fast of the fourth month, and the fast of
th fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth,
shal be to the hous of judah joy and gladness, and cheer feasts;
therefor love the truth and peace.

8:20 thu saith the lord of hosts; It shall yet come to pass, that
ther shall come people, and the inhabit of mani cities: 8:21 and
th inhabit of one citi shall go to another, saying, let us go
speedili to pray befor the lord, and to seek the lord of hosts: i
wil go also.

8:22 yea, mani peopl and strong nation shall come to seek the lord
of host in jerusalem, and to pray befor the lord.

8:23 thu saith the lord of hosts; In those day it shall come to
pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languag of the
nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a jew,
saying, We will go with you: for we have heard that god is with you.

9:1 the burden of the word of the lord in the land of hadrach, and
damascu shall be the rest thereof: when the eye of man, as of all
th tribe of israel, shall be toward the lord.

9:2 and hamath also shall border thereby; tyrus, and zidon, though it
b veri wise.

9:3 and tyru did build herself a strong hold, and heap up silver as
th dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.

9:4 behold, the lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in
th sea; and she shall be devour with fire.

9:5 ashkelon shall see it, and fear; gaza also shall see it, and be
veri sorrowful, and ekron; for her expect shall be ashamed; and
th king shall perish from gaza, and ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

9:6 and a bastard shall dwell in ashdod, and I will cut off the pride
of the philistines.

9:7 and I will take away hi blood out of hi mouth, and his
abomin from between hi teeth: but he that remaineth, even he,
shal be for our god, and he shall be as a governor in judah, and
ekron as a jebusite.

9:8 and I will encamp about mine hous becaus of the army, becaus of
him that passeth by, and becaus of him that returneth: and no
oppressor shall pass through them ani more: for now have I seen with
min eyes.

9:9 rejoic greatly, O daughter of zion; shout, O daughter of
jerusalem: behold, thi king cometh unto thee: he is just, and having
salvation; lowly, and ride upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of
an ass.

9:10 and I will cut off the chariot from ephraim, and the hors from
jerusalem, and the battl bow shall be cut off: and he shall speak
peac unto the heathen: and hi dominion shall be from sea even to
sea, and from the river even to the end of the earth.

9:11 As for thee also, by the blood of thi coven I have sent forth
thi prison out of the pit wherein is no water.

9:12 turn you to the strong hold, ye prison of hope: even to day do
i declar that I will render doubl unto thee; 9:13 when I have bent
judah for me, fill the bow with ephraim, and rais up thi sons, o
zion, against thi sons, O greece, and made thee as the sword of a
mighti man.

9:14 and the lord shall be seen over them, and hi arrow shall go
forth as the lightning: and the lord god shall blow the trumpet, and
shal go with whirlwind of the south.

9:15 the lord of host shall defend them; and they shall devour, and
subdu with sling stones; and they shall drink, and make a nois as
through wine; and they shall be fill like bowls, and as the corners
of the altar.

9:16 and the lord their god shall save them in that day as the flock
of hi people: for they shall be as the stone of a crown, lift up
a an ensign upon hi land.

9:17 for how great is hi goodness, and how great is hi beauty! corn
shal make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.

10:1 ask ye of the lord rain in the time of the latter rain; so the
lord shall make bright clouds, and give them shower of rain, to every
on grass in the field.

10:2 for the idol have spoken vanity, and the divin have seen a
lie, and have told fals dreams; they comfort in vain: therefor they
went their way as a flock, they were troubled, becaus there wa no
shepherd.

10:3 mine anger wa kindl against the shepherds, and I punish the
goats: for the lord of host hath visit hi flock the hous of
judah, and hath made them as hi goodli hors in the battle.

10:4 out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him
th battl bow, out of him everi oppressor together.

10:5 and they shall be as mighti men, which tread down their enemies
in the mire of the street in the battle: and they shall fight,
becaus the lord is with them, and the rider on hors shall be
confounded.

10:6 and I will strengthen the hous of judah, and I will save the
hous of joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have
merci upon them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off:
for I am the lord their god, and will hear them.

10:7 and they of ephraim shall be like a mighti man, and their heart
shal rejoic as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and
b glad; their heart shall rejoic in the lord.

10:8 I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeem them:
and they shall increas as they have increased.

10:9 and I will sow them among the people: and they shall rememb me
in far countries; and they shall live with their children, and turn
again.

10:10 I will bring them again also out of the land of egypt, and
gath them out of assyria; and I will bring them into the land of
gilead and lebanon; and place shall not be found for them.

10:11 and he shall pass through the sea with affliction, and shall
smit the wave in the sea, and all the deep of the river shall dry
up: and the pride of assyria shall be brought down, and the sceptr of
egypt shall depart away.

10:12 and I will strengthen them in the lord; and they shall walk up
and down in hi name, saith the lord.

11:1 open thi doors, O lebanon, that the fire may devour thi cedars.

11:2 howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; becaus the mighti are
spoiled: howl, O ye oak of bashan; for the forest of the vintag is
com down.

11:3 there is a voic of the howl of the shepherds; for their glory
i spoiled: a voic of the roar of young lions; for the pride of
jordan is spoiled.

11:4 thu saith the lord my god; feed the flock of the slaughter; 11:5
whose possessor slay them, and hold themselv not guilty: and they
that sell them say, bless be the lord; for I am rich: and their own
shepherd piti them not.

11:6 for I will no more piti the inhabit of the land, saith the
lord: but, lo, I will deliv the men everi one into hi neighbour's
hand, and into the hand of hi king: and they shall smite the land,
and out of their hand I will not deliv them.

11:7 and I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poor of the
flock. and I took unto me two staves; the one I call beauty, and the
oth I call bands; and I fed the flock.

11:8 three shepherd also I cut off in one month; and my soul lothed
them, and their soul also abhor me.

11:9 then said I, I will not feed you: that that dieth, let it die;
and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest
eat everi one the flesh of another.

11:10 and I took my staff, even beauty, and cut it asunder, that i
might break my coven which I had made with all the people.

11:11 and it wa broken in that day: and so the poor of the flock that
wait upon me knew that it wa the word of the lord.

11:12 and I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if
not, forbear. So they weigh for my price thirti piec of silver.

11:13 and the lord said unto me, cast it unto the potter: a goodly
pric that I wa prise at of them. and I took the thirti piec of
silver, and cast them to the potter in the hous of the lord.

11:14 then I cut asund mine other staff, even bands, that I might
break the brotherhood between judah and israel.

11:15 and the lord said unto me, take unto thee yet the instrument of
a foolish shepherd.

11:16 for, lo, I will rais up a shepherd in the land, which shall not
visit those that be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor
heal that that is broken, nor feed that that standeth still: but he
shal eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claw in pieces.

11:17 woe to the idol shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword shall
b upon hi arm, and upon hi right eye: hi arm shall be clean dried
up, and hi right eye shall be utterli darkened.

12:1 the burden of the word of the lord for israel, saith the lord,
which stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundat of the
earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him.

12:2 behold, I will make jerusalem a cup of trembl unto all the
peopl round about, when they shall be in the sieg both against judah
and against jerusalem.

12:3 and in that day will I make jerusalem a burdensom stone for all
people: all that burden themselv with it shall be cut in pieces,
though all the peopl of the earth be gather togeth against it.

12:4 In that day, saith the lord, I will smite everi hors with
astonishment, and hi rider with madness: and I will open mine eyes
upon the hous of judah, and will smite everi hors of the peopl with
blindness.

12:5 and the governor of judah shall say in their heart, the
inhabit of jerusalem shall be my strength in the lord of hosts
their god.

12:6 In that day will I make the governor of judah like an hearth of
fir among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they
shal devour all the peopl round about, on the right hand and on the
left: and jerusalem shall be inhabit again in her own place, even in
jerusalem.

12:7 the lord also shall save the tent of judah first, that the glory
of the hous of david and the glori of the inhabit of jerusalem do
not magnifi themselv against judah.

12:8 In that day shall the lord defend the inhabit of jerusalem;
and he that is feebl among them at that day shall be as david; and
th hous of david shall be as god, as the angel of the lord before
them.

12:9 and it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to
destroy all the nation that come against jerusalem.

12:10 and I will pour upon the hous of david, and upon the
inhabit of jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications:
and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn for him, as one mourneth for hi onli son, and shall be in
bitt for him, as one that is in bitter for hi firstborn.

12:11 In that day shall there be a great mourn in jerusalem, as the
mourn of hadadrimmon in the valley of megiddon.

12:12 and the land shall mourn, everi famili apart; the famili of the
hous of david apart, and their wive apart; the famili of the house
of nathan apart, and their wive apart; 12:13 the famili of the house
of levi apart, and their wive apart; the famili of shimei apart, and
their wive apart; 12:14 all the famili that remain, everi family
apart, and their wive apart.

13:1 In that day there shall be a fountain open to the hous of
david and to the inhabit of jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.

13:2 and it shall come to pass in that day, saith the lord of hosts,
that I will cut off the name of the idol out of the land, and they
shal no more be remembered: and also I will caus the prophet and
th unclean spirit to pass out of the land.

13:3 and it shall come to pass, that when ani shall yet prophesy, then
hi father and hi mother that begat him shall say unto him, thou
shalt not live; for thou speakest lie in the name of the lord: and
hi father and hi mother that begat him shall thrust him through when
h prophesieth.

13:4 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophet shall be
asham everi one of hi vision, when he hath prophesied; neither
shal they wear a rough garment to deceive: 13:5 but he shall say, i
am no prophet, I am an husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle
from my youth.

13:6 and one shall say unto him, what are these wound in thine hands?
then he shall answer, those with which I wa wound in the hous of
mi friends.

13:7 awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is
mi fellow, saith the lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep
shal be scattered: and I will turn mine hand upon the littl ones.

13:8 and it shall come to pass, that in all the land, saith the lord,
two part therein shall be cut off and die; but the third shall be
left therein.

13:9 and I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
them as silver is refined, and will tri them as gold is tried: they
shal call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my
people: and they shall say, the lord is my god.

14:1 behold, the day of the lord cometh, and thi spoil shall be
divid in the midst of thee.

14:2 for I will gather all nation against jerusalem to battle; and
th citi shall be taken, and the hous rifled, and the women
ravished; and half of the citi shall go forth into captivity, and the
residu of the peopl shall not be cut off from the city.

14:3 then shall the lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as
when he fought in the day of battle.

14:4 and hi feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of olives,
which is befor jerusalem on the east, and the mount of oliv shall
cleav in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and
ther shall be a veri great valley; and half of the mountain shall
remov toward the north, and half of it toward the south.

14:5 and ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley
of the mountain shall reach unto azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye
fl from befor the earthquak in the day of uzziah king of judah:
and the lord my god shall come, and all the saint with thee.

14:6 and it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not
b clear, nor dark: 14:7 but it shall be one day which shall be known
to the lord, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at
even time it shall be light.

14:8 and it shall be in that day, that live water shall go out from
jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward
th hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be.

14:9 and the lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall
ther be one lord, and hi name one.

14:10 all the land shall be turn as a plain from geba to rimmon
south of jerusalem: and it shall be lift up, and inhabit in her
place, from benjamin' gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the
corn gate, and from the tower of hananeel unto the king's
winepresses.

14:11 and men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter
destruction; but jerusalem shall be safe inhabited.

14:12 and thi shall be the plagu wherewith the lord will smite all
th peopl that have fought against jerusalem; their flesh shall
consum away while they stand upon their feet, and their eye shall
consum away in their holes, and their tongu shall consum away in
their mouth.

14:13 and it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from
th lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold everi one on the
hand of hi neighbour, and hi hand shall rise up against the hand of
hi neighbour.

14:14 and judah also shall fight at jerusalem; and the wealth of all
th heathen round about shall be gather together, gold, and silver,
and apparel, in great abundance.

14:15 and so shall be the plagu of the horse, of the mule, of the
camel, and of the ass, and of all the beast that shall be in these
tents, as thi plague.

14:16 and it shall come to pass, that everi one that is left of all
th nation which came against jerusalem shall even go up from year to
year to worship the king, the lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of
tabernacles.

14:17 and it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the families
of the earth unto jerusalem to worship the king, the lord of hosts,
even upon them shall be no rain.

14:18 and if the famili of egypt go not up, and come not, that have no
rain; there shall be the plague, wherewith the lord will smite the
heathen that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

14:19 thi shall be the punish of egypt, and the punish of all
nat that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

14:20 In that day shall there be upon the bell of the horses,
holi unto the lord; and the pot in the lord' hous shall be like
th bowl befor the altar.

14:21 yea, everi pot in jerusalem and in judah shall be holi unto
th lord of hosts: and all they that sacrific shall come and take of
them, and seeth therein: and in that day there shall be no more the
canaanit in the hous of the lord of hosts.




malachi


1:1 the burden of the word of the lord to israel by malachi.

1:2 I have love you, saith the lord. yet ye say, wherein hast thou
lov us? wa not esau jacob' brother? saith the lord: yet I loved
jacob, 1:3 and I hate esau, and laid hi mountain and hi heritage
wast for the dragon of the wilderness.

1:4 wherea edom saith, We are impoverished, but we will return and
build the desol places; thu saith the lord of hosts, they shall
build, but I will throw down; and they shall call them, the border of
wickedness, and, the peopl against whom the lord hath indign for
ever.

1:5 and your eye shall see, and ye shall say, the lord will be
magnifi from the border of israel.

1:6 A son honoureth hi father, and a servant hi master: if then I be
a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my
fear? saith the lord of host unto you, O priests, that despis my
name. and ye say, wherein have we despis thi name?  1:7 Ye offer
pollut bread upon mine altar; and ye say, wherein have we polluted
thee? In that ye say, the tabl of the lord is contemptible.

1:8 and if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye
off the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy
governor; will he be pleas with thee, or accept thi person? saith
th lord of hosts.

1:9 and now, I pray you, beseech god that he will be graciou unto us:
thi hath been by your means: will he regard your persons? saith the
lord of hosts.

1:10 who is there even among you that would shut the door for nought?
neith do ye kindl fire on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure
in you, saith the lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offer at
your hand.

1:11 for from the rise of the sun even unto the go down of the
sam my name shall be great among the gentiles; and in everi place
incens shall be offer unto my name, and a pure offering: for my
nam shall be great among the heathen, saith the lord of hosts.

1:12 but ye have profan it, in that ye say, the tabl of the lord is
polluted; and the fruit thereof, even hi meat, is contemptible.

1:13 Ye said also, behold, what a weari is it! and ye have snuffed
at it, saith the lord of hosts; and ye brought that which wa torn,
and the lame, and the sick; thu ye brought an offering: should i
accept thi of your hand? saith the lord.

1:14 but curs be the deceiver, which hath in hi flock a male, and
voweth, and sacrificeth unto the lord a corrupt thing: for I am a
great king, saith the lord of hosts, and my name is dread among the
heathen.

2:1 and now, O ye priests, thi command is for you.

2:2 If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give
glori unto my name, saith the lord of hosts, I will even send a curse
upon you, and I will curs your blessings: yea, I have curs them
already, becaus ye do not lay it to heart.

2:3 behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces,
even the dung of your solemn feasts; and one shall take you away with
it.

2:4 and ye shall know that I have sent thi command unto you, that
mi coven might be with levi, saith the lord of hosts.

2:5 My coven wa with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him
for the fear wherewith he fear me, and wa afraid befor my name.

2:6 the law of truth wa in hi mouth, and iniqu wa not found in
hi lips: he walk with me in peac and equity, and did turn many
away from iniquity.

2:7 for the priest' lip should keep knowledge, and they should seek
th law at hi mouth: for he is the messeng of the lord of hosts.

2:8 but ye are depart out of the way; ye have caus mani to stumble
at the law; ye have corrupt the coven of levi, saith the lord of
hosts.

2:9 therefor have I also made you contempt and base befor all
th people, accord as ye have not kept my ways, but have been
parti in the law.

2:10 have we not all one father? hath not one god creat us? whi do
w deal treacher everi man against hi brother, by profan the
coven of our fathers?  2:11 judah hath dealt treacherously, and an
abomin is commit in israel and in jerusalem; for judah hath
profan the holi of the lord which he loved, and hath marri the
daught of a strang god.

2:12 the lord will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the
scholar, out of the tabernacl of jacob, and him that offereth an
off unto the lord of hosts.

2:13 and thi have ye done again, cover the altar of the lord with
tears, with weeping, and with cri out, insomuch that he regardeth
not the offer ani more, or receiveth it with good will at your
hand.

2:14 yet ye say, wherefore? becaus the lord hath been wit between
the and the wife of thi youth, against whom thou hast dealt
treacherously: yet is she thi companion, and the wife of thi covenant.

2:15 and did not he make one? yet had he the residu of the spirit.
and wherefor one? that he might seek a godli seed. therefor take
he to your spirit, and let none deal treacher against the wife
of hi youth.

2:16 for the lord, the god of israel, saith that he hateth putting
away: for one covereth violenc with hi garment, saith the lord of
hosts: therefor take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not
treacherously.

2:17 Ye have weari the lord with your words. yet ye say, wherein
hav we weari him? when ye say, everi one that doeth evil is good in
th sight of the lord, and he delighteth in them; or, where is the god
of judgment?  3:1 behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall
prepar the way befor me: and the lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly
com to hi temple, even the messeng of the covenant, whom ye
delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the lord of hosts.

3:2 but who may abid the day of hi coming? and who shall stand when
h appeareth? for he is like a refiner' fire, and like fullers' soap:
3:3 and he shall sit as a refin and purifi of silver: and he shall
purifi the son of levi, and purg them as gold and silver, that they
may offer unto the lord an offer in righteousness.

3:4 then shall the offer of judah and jerusalem be pleasant unto
th lord, as in the day of old, and as in former years.

3:5 and I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift
wit against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against
fals swearers, and against those that oppress the hirel in his
wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn asid the stranger
from hi right, and fear not me, saith the lord of hosts.

3:6 for I am the lord, I chang not; therefor ye son of jacob are
not consumed.

3:7 even from the day of your father ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them. return unto me, and I will return
unto you, saith the lord of hosts. but ye said, wherein shall we
return?  3:8 will a man rob god? yet ye have rob me. but ye say,
wherein have we rob thee? In tith and offerings.

3:9 Ye are curs with a curse: for ye have rob me, even thi whole
nation.

3:10 bring ye all the tith into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the lord of
hosts, if I will not open you the window of heaven, and pour you out
a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receiv it.

3:11 and I will rebuk the devour for your sakes, and he shall not
destroy the fruit of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her
fruit befor the time in the field, saith the lord of hosts.

3:12 and all nation shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a
delightsom land, saith the lord of hosts.

3:13 your word have been stout against me, saith the lord. yet ye
say, what have we spoken so much against thee?  3:14 Ye have said, it
i vain to serv god: and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance, and that we have walk mourn befor the lord of
hosts?  3:15 and now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work
wicked are set up; yea, they that tempt god are even delivered.

3:16 then they that fear the lord spake often one to another: and
th lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembr was
written befor him for them that fear the lord, and that thought
upon hi name.

3:17 and they shall be mine, saith the lord of hosts, in that day when
i make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth hi own
son that serveth him.

3:18 then shall ye return, and discern between the righteou and the
wicked, between him that serveth god and him that serveth him not.

4:1 for, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all
th proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the
day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the lord of hosts, that it
shal leav them neither root nor branch.

4:2 but unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness
aris with heal in hi wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as
calv of the stall.

4:3 and ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ash under
th sole of your feet in the day that I shall do this, saith the lord
of hosts.

4:4 rememb ye the law of mose my servant, which I command unto
him in horeb for all israel, with the statut and judgments.

4:5 behold, I will send you elijah the prophet befor the come of
th great and dread day of the lord: 4:6 and he shall turn the
heart of the father to the children, and the heart of the children to
their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.


***




th new testament of the king jame bible




th gospel accord to saint matthew


1:1 the book of the gener of jesu christ, the son of david, the
son of abraham.

1:2 abraham begat isaac; and isaac begat jacob; and jacob begat judas
and hi brethren; 1:3 and juda begat phare and zara of thamar; and
phar begat esrom; and esrom begat aram; 1:4 and aram begat aminadab;
and aminadab begat naasson; and naasson begat salmon; 1:5 and salmon
begat booz of rachab; and booz begat obe of ruth; and obe begat
jesse; 1:6 and jess begat david the king; and david the king begat
solomon of her that had been the wife of urias; 1:7 and solomon begat
roboam; and roboam begat abia; and abia begat asa; 1:8 and asa begat
josaphat; and josaphat begat joram; and joram begat ozias; 1:9 and
ozia begat joatham; and joatham begat achaz; and achaz begat ezekias;
1:10 and ezekia begat manasses; and manass begat amon; and amon
begat josias; 1:11 and josia begat jechonia and hi brethren, about
th time they were carri away to babylon: 1:12 and after they were
brought to babylon, jechonia begat salathiel; and salathiel begat
zorobabel; 1:13 and zorobabel begat abiud; and abiud begat eliakim;
and eliakim begat azor; 1:14 and azor begat sadoc; and sadoc begat
achim; and achim begat eliud; 1:15 and eliud begat eleazar; and
eleazar begat matthan; and matthan begat jacob; 1:16 and jacob begat
joseph the husband of mary, of whom wa born jesus, who is called
christ.

1:17 So all the gener from abraham to david are fourteen
generations; and from david until the carri away into babylon are
fourteen generations; and from the carri away into babylon unto
christ are fourteen generations.

1:18 now the birth of jesu christ wa on thi wise: when as his
moth mari wa espous to joseph, befor they came together, she was
found with child of the holi ghost.

1:19 then joseph her husband, be a just man, and not will to
mak her a publick example, wa mind to put her away privily.

1:20 but while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the
lord appear unto him in a dream, saying, joseph, thou son of david,
fear not to take unto thee mari thi wife: for that which is conceived
in her is of the holi ghost.

1:21 and she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call hi name
jesus: for he shall save hi peopl from their sins.

1:22 now all thi wa done, that it might be fulfil which was
spoken of the lord by the prophet, saying, 1:23 behold, a virgin shall
b with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his
nam emmanuel, which be interpret is, god with us.

1:24 then joseph be rais from sleep did as the angel of the lord
had bidden him, and took unto him hi wife: 1:25 and knew her not till
sh had brought forth her firstborn son: and he call hi name jesus.

2:1 now when jesu wa born in bethlehem of judaea in the day of
herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to
jerusalem, 2:2 saying, where is he that is born king of the jews? for
w have seen hi star in the east, and are come to worship him.

2:3 when herod the king had heard these things, he wa troubled, and
al jerusalem with him.

2:4 and when he had gather all the chief priest and scribe of the
peopl together, he demand of them where christ should be born.

2:5 and they said unto him, In bethlehem of judaea: for thu it is
written by the prophet, 2:6 and thou bethlehem, in the land of juda,
art not the least among the princ of juda: for out of thee shall
com a governor, that shall rule my peopl israel.

2:7 then herod, when he had privili call the wise men, enquir of
them dilig what time the star appeared.

2:8 and he sent them to bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently
for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again,
that I may come and worship him also.

2:9 when they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star,
which they saw in the east, went befor them, till it came and stood
ov where the young child was.

2:10 when they saw the star, they rejoic with exceed great joy.

2:11 and when they were come into the house, they saw the young child
with mari hi mother, and fell down, and worship him: and when they
had open their treasures, they present unto him gifts; gold, and
frankincens and myrrh.

2:12 and be warn of god in a dream that they should not return to
herod, they depart into their own countri anoth way.

2:13 and when they were departed, behold, the angel of the lord
appeareth to joseph in a dream, saying, arise, and take the young
child and hi mother, and flee into egypt, and be thou there until i
br thee word: for herod will seek the young child to destroy him.

2:14 when he arose, he took the young child and hi mother by night,
and depart into egypt: 2:15 and wa there until the death of herod:
that it might be fulfil which wa spoken of the lord by the
prophet, saying, out of egypt have I call my son.

2:16 then herod, when he saw that he wa mock of the wise men, was
exceed wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were
in bethlehem, and in all the coast thereof, from two year old and
under, accord to the time which he had dilig enquir of the
wis men.

2:17 then wa fulfil that which wa spoken by jeremi the prophet,
saying, 2:18 In rama wa there a voic heard, lamentation, and
weeping, and great mourning, rachel weep for her children, and
would not be comforted, becaus they are not.

2:19 but when herod wa dead, behold, an angel of the lord appeareth
in a dream to joseph in egypt, 2:20 saying, arise, and take the young
child and hi mother, and go into the land of israel: for they are
dead which sought the young child' life.

2:21 and he arose, and took the young child and hi mother, and came
into the land of israel.

2:22 but when he heard that archelau did reign in judaea in the room
of hi father herod, he wa afraid to go thither: notwithstanding,
b warn of god in a dream, he turn asid into the part of
galilee: 2:23 and he came and dwelt in a citi call nazareth: that it
might be fulfil which wa spoken by the prophets, He shall be
cal a nazarene.

3:1 In those day came john the baptist, preach in the wilderness
of judaea, 3:2 and saying, repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand.

3:3 for thi is he that wa spoken of by the prophet esaias, saying,
th voic of one cri in the wilderness, prepar ye the way of the
lord, make hi path straight.

3:4 and the same john had hi raiment of camel' hair, and a leathern
girdl about hi loins; and hi meat wa locust and wild honey.

3:5 then went out to him jerusalem, and all judaea, and all the region
round about jordan, 3:6 and were baptiz of him in jordan, confessing
their sins.

3:7 but when he saw mani of the pharise and sadduce come to his
baptism, he said unto them, O gener of vipers, who hath warned
y to flee from the wrath to come?  3:8 bring forth therefor fruits
meet for repentance: 3:9 and think not to say within yourselves, we
hav abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that god is abl of
thes stone to rais up children unto abraham.

3:10 and now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees:
therefor everi tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down,
and cast into the fire.

3:11 I inde baptiz you with water unto repentance. but he that
cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoe I am not worthi to
bear: he shall baptiz you with the holi ghost, and with fire: 3:12
whose fan is in hi hand, and he will throughli purg hi floor, and
gath hi wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with
unquench fire.

3:13 then cometh jesu from galile to jordan unto john, to be
bapt of him.

3:14 but john forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptiz of thee,
and comest thou to me?  3:15 and jesu answer said unto him, suffer
it to be so now: for thu it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness.
then he suffer him.

3:16 and jesus, when he wa baptized, went up straightway out of the
water: and, lo, the heaven were open unto him, and he saw the
spirit of god descend like a dove, and light upon him: 3:17 and
lo a voic from heaven, saying, thi is my belov son, in whom I am
wel pleased.

4:1 then wa jesu led up of the spirit into the wilder to be
tempt of the devil.

4:2 and when he had fast forti day and forti nights, he was
afterward an hungred.

4:3 and when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the son of
god, command that these stone be made bread.

4:4 but he answer and said, It is written, man shall not live by
bread alone, but by everi word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
god.

4:5 then the devil taketh him up into the holi city, and setteth him
on a pinnacl of the temple, 4:6 and saith unto him, If thou be the
son of god, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give his
angel charg concern thee: and in their hand they shall bear thee
up, lest at ani time thou dash thi foot against a stone.

4:7 jesu said unto him, It is written again, thou shalt not tempt the
lord thi god.

4:8 again, the devil taketh him up into an exceed high mountain,
and sheweth him all the kingdom of the world, and the glori of them;
4:9 and saith unto him, all these thing will I give thee, if thou
wilt fall down and worship me.

4:10 then saith jesu unto him, get thee hence, satan: for it is
written, thou shalt worship the lord thi god, and him onli shalt thou
serve.

4:11 then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angel came and
minist unto him.

4:12 now when jesu had heard that john wa cast into prison, he
depart into galilee; 4:13 and leav nazareth, he came and dwelt in
capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the border of zabulon and
nephthalim: 4:14 that it might be fulfil which wa spoken by esaias
th prophet, saying, 4:15 the land of zabulon, and the land of
nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond jordan, galile of the
gentiles; 4:16 the peopl which sat in dark saw great light; and
to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung
up.

4:17 from that time jesu began to preach, and to say, repent: for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand.

4:18 and jesus, walk by the sea of galilee, saw two brethren, simon
cal peter, and andrew hi brother, cast a net into the sea: for
they were fishers.

4:19 and he saith unto them, follow me, and I will make you fisher of
men.

4:20 and they straightway left their nets, and follow him.

4:21 and go on from thence, he saw other two brethren, jame the
son of zebedee, and john hi brother, in a ship with zebede their
father, mend their nets; and he call them.

4:22 and they immedi left the ship and their father, and followed
him.

4:23 and jesu went about all galilee, teach in their synagogues,
and preach the gospel of the kingdom, and heal all manner of
sick and all manner of diseas among the people.

4:24 and hi fame went throughout all syria: and they brought unto him
al sick peopl that were taken with diver diseas and torments, and
thos which were possess with devils, and those which were lunatick,
and those that had the palsy; and he heal them.

4:25 and there follow him great multitud of peopl from galilee,
and from decapolis, and from jerusalem, and from judaea, and from
beyond jordan.

5:1 and see the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he
wa set, hi discipl came unto him: 5:2 and he open hi mouth, and
taught them, saying, 5:3 bless are the poor in spirit: for their is
th kingdom of heaven.

5:4 bless are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

5:5 bless are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

5:6 bless are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness:
for they shall be filled.

5:7 bless are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

5:8 bless are the pure in heart: for they shall see god.

5:9 bless are the peacemakers: for they shall be call the children
of god.

5:10 bless are they which are persecut for righteousness' sake:
for their is the kingdom of heaven.

5:11 bless are ye, when men shall revil you, and persecut you, and
shal say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.

5:12 rejoice, and be exceed glad: for great is your reward in
heaven: for so persecut they the prophet which were befor you.

5:13 Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his
savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.

5:14 Ye are the light of the world. A citi that is set on an hill
cannot be hid.

5:15 neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on
a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.

5:16 let your light so shine befor men, that they may see your good
works, and glorifi your father which is in heaven.

5:17 think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: i
am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.

5:18 for verili I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or
on tittl shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.

5:19 whosoev therefor shall break one of these least commandments,
and shall teach men so, he shall be call the least in the kingdom of
heaven: but whosoev shall do and teach them, the same shall be
cal great in the kingdom of heaven.

5:20 for I say unto you, that except your righteous shall exceed
th righteous of the scribe and pharisees, ye shall in no case
ent into the kingdom of heaven.

5:21 Ye have heard that it wa said by them of old time, thou shalt
not kill; and whosoev shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:
5:22 but I say unto you, that whosoev is angri with hi brother
without a caus shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever
shal say to hi brother, raca, shall be in danger of the council: but
whosoev shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

5:23 therefor if thou bring thi gift to the altar, and there
rememberest that thi brother hath ought against thee; 5:24 leav there
thi gift befor the altar, and go thi way; first be reconcil to thy
brother, and then come and offer thi gift.

5:25 agre with thine adversari quickly, while thou art in the way
with him; lest at ani time the adversari deliv thee to the judge,
and the judg deliv thee to the officer, and thou be cast into
prison.

5:26 verili I say unto thee, thou shalt by no mean come out thence,
til thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.

5:27 Ye have heard that it wa said by them of old time, thou shalt
not commit adultery: 5:28 but I say unto you, that whosoev looketh
on a woman to lust after her hath commit adulteri with her already
in hi heart.

5:29 and if thi right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: for it is profit for thee that one of thi member should
perish, and not that thi whole bodi should be cast into hell.

5:30 and if thi right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee: for it is profit for thee that one of thi member should
perish, and not that thi whole bodi should be cast into hell.

5:31 It hath been said, whosoev shall put away hi wife, let him
giv her a write of divorcement: 5:32 but I say unto you, that
whosoev shall put away hi wife, save for the caus of
fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoev shall marry
h that is divorc committeth adultery.

5:33 again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time,
th shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the lord thine
oaths: 5:34 but I say unto you, swear not at all; neither by heaven;
for it is god' throne: 5:35 nor by the earth; for it is his
footstool: neither by jerusalem; for it is the citi of the great king.

5:36 neither shalt thou swear by thi head, becaus thou canst not make
on hair white or black.

5:37 but let your commun be, yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever
i more than these cometh of evil.

5:38 Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth: 5:39 but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil:
but whosoev shall smite thee on thi right cheek, turn to him the
oth also.

5:40 and if ani man will sue thee at the law, and take away thi coat,
let him have thi cloak also.

5:41 and whosoev shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

5:42 give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of
the turn not thou away.

5:43 Ye have heard that it hath been said, thou shalt love thy
neighbour, and hate thine enemy.

5:44 but I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curs you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
us you, and persecut you; 5:45 that ye may be the children of your
fath which is in heaven: for he maketh hi sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.

5:46 for if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not
even the publican the same?  5:47 and if ye salut your brethren
only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publican so?  5:48
be ye therefor perfect, even as your father which is in heaven is
perfect.

6:1 take heed that ye do not your alm befor men, to be seen of them:
otherwis ye have no reward of your father which is in heaven.

6:2 therefor when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet
befor thee, as the hypocrit do in the synagogu and in the
streets, that they may have glori of men. verili I say unto you, they
hav their reward.

6:3 but when thou doest alms, let not thi left hand know what thy
right hand doeth: 6:4 that thine alm may be in secret: and thi father
which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly.

6:5 and when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrit are:
for they love to pray stand in the synagogu and in the corner of
th streets, that they may be seen of men. verili I say unto you, they
hav their reward.

6:6 but thou, when thou prayest, enter into thi closet, and when thou
hast shut thi door, pray to thi father which is in secret; and thy
fath which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.

6:7 but when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

6:8 Be not ye therefor like unto them: for your father knoweth what
th ye have need of, befor ye ask him.

6:9 after thi manner therefor pray ye: our father which art in
heaven, hallow be thi name.

6:10 thi kingdom come, thi will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

6:11 give us thi day our daili bread.

6:12 and forgiv us our debts, as we forgiv our debtors.

6:13 and lead us not into temptation, but deliv us from evil: for
thin is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. amen.

6:14 for if ye forgiv men their trespasses, your heavenli father will
also forgiv you: 6:15 but if ye forgiv not men their trespasses,
neith will your father forgiv your trespasses.

6:16 moreov when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance: for they disfigur their faces, that they may appear unto
men to fast. verili I say unto you, they have their reward.

6:17 but thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy
face; 6:18 that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thi father
which is in secret: and thi father, which seeth in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

6:19 lay not up for yourselv treasur upon earth, where moth and
rust doth corrupt, and where thiev break through and steal: 6:20 but
lay up for yourselv treasur in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
doth corrupt, and where thiev do not break through nor steal: 6:21
for where your treasur is, there will your heart be also.

6:22 the light of the bodi is the eye: if therefor thine eye be
single, thi whole bodi shall be full of light.

6:23 but if thine eye be evil, thi whole bodi shall be full of
darkness.

if therefor the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness!  6:24 No man can serv two masters: for either he will hate
th one, and love the other; or els he will hold to the one, and
despis the other. Ye cannot serv god and mammon.

6:25 therefor I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye
shal eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye
shal put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the bodi than
raiment?  6:26 behold the fowl of the air: for they sow not, neither
do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenli father feedeth
them. are ye not much better than they?  6:27 which of you by taking
thought can add one cubit unto hi stature?  6:28 and whi take ye
thought for raiment? consid the lili of the field, how they grow;
they toil not, neither do they spin: 6:29 and yet I say unto you, that
even solomon in all hi glori wa not array like one of these.

6:30 wherefore, if god so cloth the grass of the field, which to day
is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe
you, O ye of littl faith?  6:31 therefor take no thought, saying,
what shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or, wherewith shall we
b clothed?  6:32 (for after all these thing do the gentil seek:)
for your heavenli father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things.

6:33 but seek ye first the kingdom of god, and hi righteousness; and
al these thing shall be ad unto you.

6:34 take therefor no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall
tak thought for the thing of itself. suffici unto the day is the
evil thereof.

7:1 judg not, that ye be not judged.

7:2 for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measur ye mete, it shall be measur to you again.

7:3 and whi beholdest thou the mote that is in thi brother' eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?  7:4 Or how wilt
thou say to thi brother, let me pull out the mote out of thine eye;
and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?  7:5 thou hypocrite, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see
clearli to cast out the mote out of thi brother' eye.

7:6 give not that which is holi unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearl befor swine, lest they trampl them under their feet, and turn
again and rend you.

7:7 ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock,
and it shall be open unto you: 7:8 for everi one that asketh
receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it
shal be opened.

7:9 Or what man is there of you, whom if hi son ask bread, will he
giv him a stone?  7:10 Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a
serpent?  7:11 If ye then, be evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your father which is in heaven
g good thing to them that ask him?  7:12 therefor all things
whatsoev ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for thi is the law and the prophets.

7:13 enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad
i the way, that leadeth to destruction, and mani there be which go in
thereat: 7:14 becaus strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.

7:15 bewar of fals prophets, which come to you in sheep' clothing,
but inwardli they are raven wolves.

7:16 Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grape of
thorns, or fig of thistles?  7:17 even so everi good tree bringeth
forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

7:18 A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tre bring forth good fruit.

7:19 everi tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

7:20 wherefor by their fruit ye shall know them.

7:21 not everi one that saith unto me, lord, lord, shall enter into
th kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my father which
i in heaven.

7:22 mani will say to me in that day, lord, lord, have we not
prophesi in thi name? and in thi name have cast out devils? and in
thi name done mani wonder works?  7:23 and then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

7:24 therefor whosoev heareth these say of mine, and doeth
them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built hi hous upon a
rock: 7:25 and the rain descended, and the flood came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it wa founded
upon a rock.

7:26 and everi one that heareth these say of mine, and doeth them
not, shall be liken unto a foolish man, which built hi hous upon
th sand: 7:27 and the rain descended, and the flood came, and the
wind blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great wa the
fal of it.

7:28 and it came to pass, when jesu had end these sayings, the
peopl were astonish at hi doctrine: 7:29 for he taught them as one
hav authority, and not as the scribes.

8:1 when he wa come down from the mountain, great multitud followed
him.

8:2 and, behold, there came a leper and worship him, saying, lord,
if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

8:3 and jesu put forth hi hand, and touch him, saying, I will; be
thou clean. and immedi hi leprosi wa cleansed.

8:4 and jesu saith unto him, see thou tell no man; but go thi way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that mose commanded,
for a testimoni unto them.

8:5 and when jesu wa enter into capernaum, there came unto him a
centurion, beseech him, 8:6 and saying, lord, my servant lieth at
hom sick of the palsy, grievous tormented.

8:7 and jesu saith unto him, I will come and heal him.

8:8 the centurion answer and said, lord, I am not worthi that thou
shouldest come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant
shal be healed.

8:9 for I am a man under authority, have soldier under me: and i
say to thi man, go, and he goeth; and to another, come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.

8:10 when jesu heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that
followed, verili I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no,
not in israel.

8:11 and I say unto you, that mani shall come from the east and west,
and shall sit down with abraham, and isaac, and jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven.

8:12 but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer
darkness: there shall be weep and gnash of teeth.

8:13 and jesu said unto the centurion, Go thi way; and as thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee. and hi servant wa heal in the
selfsam hour.

8:14 and when jesu wa come into peter' house, he saw hi wife's
moth laid, and sick of a fever.

8:15 and he touch her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose,
and minist unto them.

8:16 when the even wa come, they brought unto him mani that were
possess with devils: and he cast out the spirit with hi word, and
heal all that were sick: 8:17 that it might be fulfil which was
spoken by esaia the prophet, saying, himself took our infirmities,
and bare our sicknesses.

8:18 now when jesu saw great multitud about him, he gave
command to depart unto the other side.

8:19 and a certain scribe came, and said unto him, master, I will
follow thee whithersoev thou goest.

8:20 and jesu saith unto him, the fox have holes, and the bird of
th air have nests; but the son of man hath not where to lay hi head.

8:21 and anoth of hi discipl said unto him, lord, suffer me first
to go and buri my father.

8:22 but jesu said unto him, follow me; and let the dead buri their
dead.

8:23 and when he wa enter into a ship, hi discipl follow him.

8:24 and, behold, there aros a great tempest in the sea, insomuch
that the ship wa cover with the waves: but he wa asleep.

8:25 and hi discipl came to him, and awok him, saying, lord, save
us: we perish.

8:26 and he saith unto them, whi are ye fearful, O ye of littl faith?
then he arose, and rebuk the wind and the sea; and there wa a
great calm.

8:27 but the men marvelled, saying, what manner of man is this, that
even the wind and the sea obey him!  8:28 and when he wa come to the
oth side into the countri of the gergesenes, there met him two
possess with devils, come out of the tombs, exceed fierce, so
that no man might pass by that way.

8:29 and, behold, they cri out, saying, what have we to do with
thee, jesus, thou son of god? art thou come hither to torment us
befor the time?  8:30 and there wa a good way off from them an herd
of mani swine feeding.

8:31 So the devil besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer
u to go away into the herd of swine.

8:32 and he said unto them, go. and when they were come out, they went
into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran
viol down a steep place into the sea, and perish in the waters.

8:33 and they that kept them fled, and went their way into the city,
and told everi thing, and what wa befallen to the possess of the
devils.

8:34 and, behold, the whole citi came out to meet jesus: and when they
saw him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.

9:1 and he enter into a ship, and pass over, and came into hi own
city.

9:2 and, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lie on
a bed: and jesu see their faith said unto the sick of the palsy;
son, be of good cheer; thi sin be forgiven thee.

9:3 and, behold, certain of the scribe said within themselves, this
man blasphemeth.

9:4 and jesu know their thought said, wherefor think ye evil in
your hearts?  9:5 for whether is easier, to say, thi sin be forgiven
thee; or to say, arise, and walk?  9:6 but that ye may know that the
son of man hath power on earth to forgiv sins, (then saith he to the
sick of the palsy,) arise, take up thi bed, and go unto thine house.

9:7 and he arose, and depart to hi house.

9:8 but when the multitud saw it, they marvelled, and glorifi god,
which had given such power unto men.

9:9 and as jesu pass forth from thence, he saw a man, named
matthew, sit at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him,
follow me. and he arose, and follow him.

9:10 and it came to pass, as jesu sat at meat in the house, behold,
mani publican and sinner came and sat down with him and his
disciples.

9:11 and when the pharise saw it, they said unto hi disciples, why
eateth your master with publican and sinners?  9:12 but when jesus
heard that, he said unto them, they that be whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick.

9:13 but go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinner to
repentance.

9:14 then came to him the discipl of john, saying, whi do we and the
pharise fast oft, but thi discipl fast not?  9:15 and jesu said
unto them, can the children of the bridechamb mourn, as long as the
bridegroom is with them? but the day will come, when the bridegroom
shal be taken from them, and then shall they fast.

9:16 No man putteth a piec of new cloth unto an old garment, for that
which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is
mad worse.

9:17 neither do men put new wine into old bottles: els the bottles
break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottl perish: but they put
new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.

9:18 while he spake these thing unto them, behold, there came a
certain ruler, and worship him, saying, My daughter is even now
dead: but come and lay thi hand upon her, and she shall live.

9:19 and jesu arose, and follow him, and so did hi disciples.

9:20 and, behold, a woman, which wa diseas with an issu of blood
twelv years, came behind him, and touch the hem of hi garment:
9:21 for she said within herself, If I may but touch hi garment, i
shal be whole.

9:22 but jesu turn him about, and when he saw her, he said,
daughter, be of good comfort; thi faith hath made thee whole. and the
woman wa made whole from that hour.

9:23 and when jesu came into the ruler' house, and saw the minstrels
and the peopl make a noise, 9:24 He said unto them, give place: for
th maid is not dead, but sleepeth. and they laugh him to scorn.

9:25 but when the peopl were put forth, he went in, and took her by
th hand, and the maid arose.

9:26 and the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.

9:27 and when jesu depart thence, two blind men follow him,
crying, and saying, thou son of david, have merci on us.

9:28 and when he wa come into the house, the blind men came to him:
and jesu saith unto them, believ ye that I am abl to do this? they
said unto him, yea, lord.

9:29 then touch he their eyes, saying, accord to your faith be it
unto you.

9:30 and their eye were opened; and jesu straitli charg them,
saying, see that no man know it.

9:31 but they, when they were departed, spread abroad hi fame in all
that country.

9:32 As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man
possess with a devil.

9:33 and when the devil wa cast out, the dumb spake: and the
multitud marvelled, saying, It wa never so seen in israel.

9:34 but the pharise said, He casteth out devil through the prince
of the devils.

9:35 and jesu went about all the citi and villages, teach in
their synagogues, and preach the gospel of the kingdom, and healing
everi sick and everi diseas among the people.

9:36 but when he saw the multitudes, he wa move with compass on
them, becaus they fainted, and were scatter abroad, as sheep having
no shepherd.

9:37 then saith he unto hi disciples, the harvest truli is plenteous,
but the labour are few; 9:38 pray ye therefor the lord of the
harvest, that he will send forth labour into hi harvest.

10:1 and when he had call unto him hi twelv disciples, he gave
them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
mann of sick and all manner of disease.

10:2 now the name of the twelv apostl are these; the first, simon,
who is call peter, and andrew hi brother; jame the son of zebedee,
and john hi brother; 10:3 philip, and bartholomew; thomas, and
matthew the publican; jame the son of alphaeus, and lebbaeus, whose
surnam wa thaddaeus; 10:4 simon the canaanite, and juda iscariot,
who also betray him.

10:5 these twelv jesu sent forth, and command them, saying, Go not
into the way of the gentiles, and into ani citi of the samaritans
ent ye not: 10:6 but go rather to the lost sheep of the hous of
israel.

10:7 and as ye go, preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

10:8 heal the sick, cleans the lepers, rais the dead, cast out
devils: freeli ye have received, freeli give.

10:9 provid neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, 10:10
nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet
staves: for the workman is worthi of hi meat.

10:11 and into whatsoev citi or town ye shall enter, enquir who in
it is worthy; and there abid till ye go thence.

10:12 and when ye come into an house, salut it.

10:13 and if the hous be worthy, let your peac come upon it: but if
it be not worthy, let your peac return to you.

10:14 and whosoev shall not receiv you, nor hear your words, when
y depart out of that hous or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

10:15 verili I say unto you, It shall be more toler for the land
of sodom and gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

10:16 behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefor wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

10:17 but bewar of men: for they will deliv you up to the councils,
and they will scourg you in their synagogues; 10:18 and ye shall be
brought befor governor and king for my sake, for a testimony
against them and the gentiles.

10:19 but when they deliv you up, take no thought how or what ye
shal speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall
speak.

10:20 for it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which
speaketh in you.

10:21 and the brother shall deliv up the brother to death, and the
fath the child: and the children shall rise up against their
parents, and caus them to be put to death.

10:22 and ye shall be hate of all men for my name' sake: but he that
endureth to the end shall be saved.

10:23 but when they persecut you in thi city, flee ye into another:
for verili I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the citi of
israel, till the son of man be come.

10:24 the discipl is not abov hi master, nor the servant abov his
lord.

10:25 It is enough for the discipl that he be as hi master, and the
serv as hi lord. If they have call the master of the house
beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of hi household?  10:26
fear them not therefore: for there is noth covered, that shall not
b revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.

10:27 what I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye
hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops.

10:28 and fear not them which kill the body, but are not abl to kill
th soul: but rather fear him which is abl to destroy both soul and
bodi in hell.

10:29 are not two sparrow sold for a farthing? and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your father.

10:30 but the veri hair of your head are all numbered.

10:31 fear ye not therefore, ye are of more valu than mani sparrows.

10:32 whosoev therefor shall confess me befor men, him will i
confess also befor my father which is in heaven.

10:33 but whosoev shall deni me befor men, him will I also deny
befor my father which is in heaven.

10:34 think not that I am come to send peac on earth: I came not to
send peace, but a sword.

10:35 for I am come to set a man at varianc against hi father, and
th daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her
moth in law.

10:36 and a man' foe shall be they of hi own household.

10:37 He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthi of
me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthi of
me.

10:38 and he that taketh not hi cross, and followeth after me, is not
worthi of me.

10:39 He that findeth hi life shall lose it: and he that loseth his
lif for my sake shall find it.

10:40 He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me
receiveth him that sent me.

10:41 He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall
rec a prophet' reward; and he that receiveth a righteou man in
th name of a righteou man shall receiv a righteou man' reward.

10:42 and whosoev shall give to drink unto one of these littl ones
a cup of cold water onli in the name of a disciple, verili I say unto
you, he shall in no wise lose hi reward.

11:1 and it came to pass, when jesu had made an end of command his
twelv disciples, he depart thenc to teach and to preach in their
cities.

11:2 now when john had heard in the prison the work of christ, he
sent two of hi disciples, 11:3 and said unto him, art thou he that
should come, or do we look for another?  11:4 jesu answer and said
unto them, Go and shew john again those thing which ye do hear and
see: 11:5 the blind receiv their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers
ar cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are rais up, and the poor
hav the gospel preach to them.

11:6 and bless is he, whosoev shall not be offend in me.

11:7 and as they departed, jesu began to say unto the multitudes
concern john, what went ye out into the wilder to see? A reed
shaken with the wind?  11:8 but what went ye out for to see? A man
cloth in soft raiment?  behold, they that wear soft cloth are in
kings' houses.

11:9 but what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you,
and more than a prophet.

11:10 for thi is he, of whom it is written, behold, I send my
messeng befor thi face, which shall prepar thi way befor thee.

11:11 verili I say unto you, among them that are born of women there
hath not risen a greater than john the baptist: notwithstand he
that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

11:12 and from the day of john the baptist until now the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.

11:13 for all the prophet and the law prophesi until john.

11:14 and if ye will receiv it, thi is elias, which wa for to come.

11:15 He that hath ear to hear, let him hear.

11:16 but whereunto shall I liken thi generation? It is like unto
children sit in the markets, and call unto their fellows, 11:17
and saying, We have pipe unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourn unto you, and ye have not lamented.

11:18 for john came neither eat nor drinking, and they say, He hath
a devil.

11:19 the son of man came eat and drinking, and they say, behold a
man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publican and sinners.
but wisdom is justifi of her children.

11:20 then began he to upbraid the citi wherein most of hi mighty
work were done, becaus they repent not: 11:21 woe unto thee,
chorazin! woe unto thee, bethsaida! for if the mighti works, which
wer done in you, had been done in tyre and sidon, they would have
rep long ago in sackcloth and ashes.

11:22 but I say unto you, It shall be more toler for tyre and
sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.

11:23 and thou, capernaum, which art exalt unto heaven, shalt be
brought down to hell: for if the mighti works, which have been done in
thee, had been done in sodom, it would have remain until thi day.

11:24 but I say unto you, that it shall be more toler for the land
of sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.

11:25 At that time jesu answer and said, I thank thee, O father,
lord of heaven and earth, becaus thou hast hid these thing from the
wis and prudent, and hast reveal them unto babes.

11:26 even so, father: for so it seem good in thi sight.

11:27 all thing are deliv unto me of my father: and no man
knoweth the son, but the father; neither knoweth ani man the father,
sav the son, and he to whomsoev the son will reveal him.

11:28 come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavi laden, and I will
giv you rest.

11:29 take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

11:30 for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

12:1 At that time jesu went on the sabbath day through the corn; and
hi discipl were an hungred, and began to pluck the ear of corn and
to eat.

12:2 but when the pharise saw it, they said unto him, behold, thy
discipl do that which is not law to do upon the sabbath day.

12:3 but he said unto them, have ye not read what david did, when he
wa an hungred, and they that were with him; 12:4 how he enter into
th hous of god, and did eat the shewbread, which wa not law for
him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but onli for the
priests?  12:5 Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath
day the priest in the templ profan the sabbath, and are blameless?
12:6 but I say unto you, that in thi place is one greater than the
temple.

12:7 but if ye had known what thi meaneth, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemn the guiltless.

12:8 for the son of man is lord even of the sabbath day.

12:9 and when he wa depart thence, he went into their synagogue:
12:10 and, behold, there wa a man which had hi hand withered. and
they ask him, saying, Is it law to heal on the sabbath days? that
they might accus him.

12:11 and he said unto them, what man shall there be among you, that
shal have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day,
wil he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?  12:12 how much then is a
man better than a sheep? wherefor it is law to do well on the
sabbath days.

12:13 then saith he to the man, stretch forth thine hand. and he
stretch it forth; and it wa restor whole, like as the other.

12:14 then the pharise went out, and held a council against him, how
they might destroy him.

12:15 but when jesu knew it, he withdrew himself from thence: and
great multitud follow him, and he heal them all; 12:16 and
charg them that they should not make him known: 12:17 that it might
b fulfil which wa spoken by esaia the prophet, saying, 12:18
behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is
wel pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew
judg to the gentiles.

12:19 He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall ani man hear his
voic in the streets.

12:20 A bruis reed shall he not break, and smoke flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.

12:21 and in hi name shall the gentil trust.

12:22 then wa brought unto him one possess with a devil, blind, and
dumb: and he heal him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake
and saw.

12:23 and all the peopl were amazed, and said, Is not thi the son of
david?  12:24 but when the pharise heard it, they said, thi fellow
doth not cast out devils, but by beelzebub the princ of the devils.

12:25 and jesu knew their thoughts, and said unto them, everi kingdom
divid against itself is brought to desolation; and everi citi or
hous divid against itself shall not stand: 12:26 and if satan cast
out satan, he is divid against himself; how shall then hi kingdom
stand?  12:27 and if I by beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your
children cast them out? therefor they shall be your judges.

12:28 but if I cast out devil by the spirit of god, then the kingdom
of god is come unto you.

12:29 Or els how can one enter into a strong man' house, and spoil
hi goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil
hi house.

12:30 He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth abroad.

12:31 wherefor I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemi shall
b forgiven unto men: but the blasphemi against the holi ghost shall
not be forgiven unto men.

12:32 and whosoev speaketh a word against the son of man, it shall
b forgiven him: but whosoev speaketh against the holi ghost, it
shal not be forgiven him, neither in thi world, neither in the world
to come.

12:33 either make the tree good, and hi fruit good; or els make the
tre corrupt, and hi fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his
fruit.

12:34 O gener of vipers, how can ye, be evil, speak good
things?  for out of the abund of the heart the mouth speaketh.

12:35 A good man out of the good treasur of the heart bringeth forth
good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasur bringeth forth
evil things.

12:36 but I say unto you, that everi idl word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.

12:37 for by thi word thou shalt be justified, and by thi word thou
shalt be condemned.

12:38 then certain of the scribe and of the pharise answered,
saying, master, we would see a sign from thee.

12:39 but he answer and said unto them, An evil and adulterous
gener seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to
it, but the sign of the prophet jonas: 12:40 for as jona wa three
day and three night in the whale' belly; so shall the son of man be
thre day and three night in the heart of the earth.

12:41 the men of nineveh shall rise in judgment with thi generation,
and shall condemn it: becaus they repent at the preach of jonas;
and, behold, a greater than jona is here.

12:42 the queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost
part of the earth to hear the wisdom of solomon; and, behold, a
great than solomon is here.

12:43 when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
dri places, seek rest, and findeth none.

12:44 then he saith, I will return into my hous from whenc I came
out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.

12:45 then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirit more
wick than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last
stat of that man is wors than the first. even so shall it be also
unto thi wick generation.

12:46 while he yet talk to the people, behold, hi mother and his
brethren stood without, desir to speak with him.

12:47 then one said unto him, behold, thi mother and thi brethren
stand without, desir to speak with thee.

12:48 but he answer and said unto him that told him, who is my
mother?  and who are my brethren?  12:49 and he stretch forth his
hand toward hi disciples, and said, behold my mother and my brethren!
12:50 for whosoev shall do the will of my father which is in heaven,
th same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

13:1 the same day went jesu out of the house, and sat by the sea
side.

13:2 and great multitud were gather togeth unto him, so that he
went into a ship, and sat; and the whole multitud stood on the shore.

13:3 and he spake mani thing unto them in parables, saying, behold, a
sow went forth to sow; 13:4 and when he sowed, some seed fell by
th way side, and the fowl came and devour them up: 13:5 some fell
upon stoni places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they
sprung up, becaus they had no deep of earth: 13:6 and when the
sun wa up, they were scorched; and becaus they had no root, they
with away.

13:7 and some fell among thorns; and the thorn sprung up, and choked
them: 13:8 but other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit,
som an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.

13:9 who hath ear to hear, let him hear.

13:10 and the discipl came, and said unto him, whi speakest thou
unto them in parables?  13:11 He answer and said unto them, because
it is given unto you to know the mysteri of the kingdom of heaven,
but to them it is not given.

13:12 for whosoev hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have
mor abundance: but whosoev hath not, from him shall be taken away
even that he hath.

13:13 therefor speak I to them in parables: becaus they see see
not; and hear they hear not, neither do they understand.

13:14 and in them is fulfil the propheci of esaias, which saith, by
hear ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and see ye shall
see, and shall not perceive: 13:15 for thi people' heart is waxed
gross, and their ear are dull of hearing, and their eye they have
closed; lest at ani time they should see with their eye and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

13:16 but bless are your eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they
hear.

13:17 for verili I say unto you, that mani prophet and righteou men
hav desir to see those thing which ye see, and have not seen them;
and to hear those thing which ye hear, and have not heard them.

13:18 hear ye therefor the parabl of the sower.

13:19 when ani one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth
it not, then cometh the wick one, and catcheth away that which was
sown in hi heart. thi is he which receiv seed by the way side.

13:20 but he that receiv the seed into stoni places, the same is he
that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it; 13:21 yet hath
h not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation
or persecut ariseth becaus of the word, by and by he is offended.

13:22 He also that receiv seed among the thorn is he that heareth
th word; and the care of thi world, and the deceit of riches,
chok the word, and he becometh unfruitful.

13:23 but he that receiv seed into the good ground is he that
heareth the word, and understandeth it; which also beareth fruit, and
bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.

13:24 anoth parabl put he forth unto them, saying, the kingdom of
heaven is liken unto a man which sow good seed in hi field: 13:25
but while men slept, hi enemi came and sow tare among the wheat,
and went hi way.

13:26 but when the blade wa sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then
appear the tare also.

13:27 So the servant of the household came and said unto him, sir,
didst not thou sow good seed in thi field? from whenc then hath it
tares?  13:28 He said unto them, An enemi hath done this. the servants
said unto him, wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?  13:29
but he said, nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also
th wheat with them.

13:30 let both grow togeth until the harvest: and in the time of
harvest I will say to the reapers, gather ye togeth first the tares,
and bind them in bundl to burn them: but gather the wheat into my
barn.

13:31 anoth parabl put he forth unto them, saying, the kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed
in hi field: 13:32 which inde is the least of all seeds: but when
it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so
that the bird of the air come and lodg in the branch thereof.

13:33 anoth parabl spake he unto them; the kingdom of heaven is
lik unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measur of
meal, till the whole wa leavened.

13:34 all these thing spake jesu unto the multitud in parables; and
without a parabl spake he not unto them: 13:35 that it might be
fulfil which wa spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my
mouth in parables; I will utter thing which have been kept secret
from the foundat of the world.

13:36 then jesu sent the multitud away, and went into the house: and
hi discipl came unto him, saying, declar unto us the parabl of
th tare of the field.

13:37 He answer and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is
th son of man; 13:38 the field is the world; the good seed are the
children of the kingdom; but the tare are the children of the wicked
one; 13:39 the enemi that sow them is the devil; the harvest is the
end of the world; and the reaper are the angels.

13:40 As therefor the tare are gather and burn in the fire; so
shal it be in the end of thi world.

13:41 the son of man shall send forth hi angels, and they shall
gath out of hi kingdom all thing that offend, and them which do
iniquity; 13:42 and shall cast them into a furnac of fire: there
shal be wail and gnash of teeth.

13:43 then shall the righteou shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
of their father. who hath ear to hear, let him hear.

13:44 again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasur hid in a
field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof
goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

13:45 again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man,
seek goodli pearls: 13:46 who, when he had found one pearl of great
price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

13:47 again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that wa cast
into the sea, and gather of everi kind: 13:48 which, when it was
full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gather the good into
vessels, but cast the bad away.

13:49 So shall it be at the end of the world: the angel shall come
forth, and sever the wick from among the just, 13:50 and shall cast
them into the furnac of fire: there shall be wail and gnash of
teeth.

13:51 jesu saith unto them, have ye understood all these things? they
say unto him, yea, lord.

13:52 then said he unto them, therefor everi scribe which is
instruct unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder, which bringeth forth out of hi treasur thing new and
old.

13:53 and it came to pass, that when jesu had finish these
parables, he depart thence.

13:54 and when he wa come into hi own country, he taught them in
their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, whence
hath thi man thi wisdom, and these mighti works?  13:55 Is not this
th carpenter' son? is not hi mother call mary? and hi brethren,
james, and joses, and simon, and judas?  13:56 and hi sisters, are
they not all with us? whenc then hath thi man all these things?
13:57 and they were offend in him. but jesu said unto them, a
prophet is not without honour, save in hi own country, and in hi own
house.

13:58 and he did not mani mighti work there becaus of their
unbelief.

14:1 At that time herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of jesus, 14:2
and said unto hi servants, thi is john the baptist; he is risen from
th dead; and therefor mighti work do shew forth themselv in him.

14:3 for herod had laid hold on john, and bound him, and put him in
prison for herodias' sake, hi brother philip' wife.

14:4 for john said unto him, It is not law for thee to have her.

14:5 and when he would have put him to death, he fear the multitude,
becaus they count him as a prophet.

14:6 but when herod' birthday wa kept, the daughter of herodias
danc befor them, and pleas herod.

14:7 whereupon he promis with an oath to give her whatsoev she
would ask.

14:8 and she, be befor instruct of her mother, said, give me
her john baptist' head in a charger.

14:9 and the king wa sorry: nevertheless for the oath' sake, and
them which sat with him at meat, he command it to be given her.

14:10 and he sent, and behead john in the prison.

14:11 and hi head wa brought in a charger, and given to the damsel:
and she brought it to her mother.

14:12 and hi discipl came, and took up the body, and buri it, and
went and told jesus.

14:13 when jesu heard of it, he depart thenc by ship into a desert
plac apart: and when the peopl had heard thereof, they follow him
on foot out of the cities.

14:14 and jesu went forth, and saw a great multitude, and wa moved
with compass toward them, and he heal their sick.

14:15 and when it wa evening, hi discipl came to him, saying, this
i a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitud away,
that they may go into the villages, and buy themselv victuals.

14:16 but jesu said unto them, they need not depart; give ye them to
eat.

14:17 and they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two
fishes.

14:18 He said, bring them hither to me.

14:19 and he command the multitud to sit down on the grass, and
took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and look up to heaven, he
blessed, and brake, and gave the loav to hi disciples, and the
discipl to the multitude.

14:20 and they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the
frag that remain twelv basket full.

14:21 and they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside
women and children.

14:22 and straightway jesu constrain hi discipl to get into a
ship, and to go befor him unto the other side, while he sent the
multitud away.

14:23 and when he had sent the multitud away, he went up into a
mountain apart to pray: and when the even wa come, he wa there
alone.

14:24 but the ship wa now in the midst of the sea, toss with waves:
for the wind wa contrary.

14:25 and in the fourth watch of the night jesu went unto them,
walk on the sea.

14:26 and when the discipl saw him walk on the sea, they were
troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cri out for fear.

14:27 but straightway jesu spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer;
it is I; be not afraid.

14:28 and peter answer him and said, lord, if it be thou, bid me
com unto thee on the water.

14:29 and he said, come. and when peter wa come down out of the ship,
h walk on the water, to go to jesus.

14:30 but when he saw the wind boisterous, he wa afraid; and
begin to sink, he cried, saying, lord, save me.

14:31 and immedi jesu stretch forth hi hand, and caught him,
and said unto him, O thou of littl faith, wherefor didst thou doubt?
14:32 and when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.

14:33 then they that were in the ship came and worship him, saying,
of a truth thou art the son of god.

14:34 and when they were gone over, they came into the land of
gennesaret.

14:35 and when the men of that place had knowledg of him, they sent
out into all that countri round about, and brought unto him all that
wer diseased; 14:36 and besought him that they might onli touch the
hem of hi garment: and as mani as touch were made perfectli whole.

15:1 then came to jesu scribe and pharisees, which were of
jerusalem, saying, 15:2 whi do thi discipl transgress the tradition
of the elders? for they wash not their hand when they eat bread.

15:3 but he answer and said unto them, whi do ye also transgress the
command of god by your tradition?  15:4 for god commanded, saying,
honour thi father and mother: and, He that curseth father or mother,
let him die the death.

15:5 but ye say, whosoev shall say to hi father or hi mother, it
i a gift, by whatsoev thou mightest be profit by me; 15:6 and
honour not hi father or hi mother, he shall be free. thu have ye
mad the command of god of none effect by your tradition.

15:7 Ye hypocrites, well did esaia prophesi of you, saying, 15:8 this
peopl draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with
their lips; but their heart is far from me.

15:9 but in vain they do worship me, teach for doctrin the
command of men.

15:10 and he call the multitude, and said unto them, hear, and
understand: 15:11 not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man;
but that which cometh out of the mouth, thi defileth a man.

15:12 then came hi disciples, and said unto him, knowest thou that
th pharise were offended, after they heard thi saying?  15:13 but
h answer and said, everi plant, which my heavenli father hath not
planted, shall be root up.

15:14 let them alone: they be blind leader of the blind. and if the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

15:15 then answer peter and said unto him, declar unto us this
parable.

15:16 and jesu said, are ye also yet without understanding?  15:17 do
not ye yet understand, that whatsoev entereth in at the mouth goeth
into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?  15:18 but those
th which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and
they defil the man.

15:19 for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, fals witness, blasphemies: 15:20 these are the
th which defil a man: but to eat with unwashen hand defileth not
a man.

15:21 then jesu went thence, and depart into the coast of tyre and
sidon.

15:22 and, behold, a woman of canaan came out of the same coasts, and
cri unto him, saying, have merci on me, O lord, thou son of david;
mi daughter is grievous vex with a devil.

15:23 but he answer her not a word. and hi discipl came and
besought him, saying, send her away; for she crieth after us.

15:24 but he answer and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep
of the hous of israel.

15:25 then came she and worship him, saying, lord, help me.

15:26 but he answer and said, It is not meet to take the children's
bread, and to cast it to dogs.

15:27 and she said, truth, lord: yet the dog eat of the crumb which
fal from their masters' table.

15:28 then jesu answer and said unto her, O woman, great is thy
faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt. and her daughter wa made
whol from that veri hour.

15:29 and jesu depart from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of
galilee; and went up into a mountain, and sat down there.

15:30 and great multitud came unto him, have with them those that
wer lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and mani others, and cast them down at
jesus' feet; and he heal them: 15:31 insomuch that the multitude
wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maim to be whole, the
lam to walk, and the blind to see: and they glorifi the god of
israel.

15:32 then jesu call hi discipl unto him, and said, I have
compass on the multitude, becaus they continu with me now three
days, and have noth to eat: and I will not send them away fasting,
lest they faint in the way.

15:33 and hi discipl say unto him, whenc should we have so much
bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?  15:34 and
jesu saith unto them, how mani loav have ye? and they said, seven,
and a few littl fishes.

15:35 and he command the multitud to sit down on the ground.

15:36 and he took the seven loav and the fishes, and gave thanks,
and brake them, and gave to hi disciples, and the discipl to the
multitude.

15:37 and they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the
broken meat that wa left seven basket full.

15:38 and they that did eat were four thousand men, besid women and
children.

15:39 and he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the
coast of magdala.

16:1 the pharise also with the sadduce came, and tempt desired
him that he would shew them a sign from heaven.

16:2 He answer and said unto them, when it is evening, ye say, it
wil be fair weather: for the sky is red.

16:3 and in the morning, It will be foul weather to day: for the sky
i red and lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the
sky; but can ye not discern the sign of the times?  16:4 A wick and
adulter gener seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be
given unto it, but the sign of the prophet jonas. and he left them,
and departed.

16:5 and when hi discipl were come to the other side, they had
forgotten to take bread.

16:6 then jesu said unto them, take heed and bewar of the leaven of
th pharise and of the sadducees.

16:7 and they reason among themselves, saying, It is becaus we have
taken no bread.

16:8 which when jesu perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little
faith, whi reason ye among yourselves, becaus ye have brought no
bread?  16:9 Do ye not yet understand, neither rememb the five
loav of the five thousand, and how mani basket ye took up?  16:10
neither the seven loav of the four thousand, and how mani basket ye
took up?  16:11 how is it that ye do not understand that I spake it
not to you concern bread, that ye should bewar of the leaven of
th pharise and of the sadducees?  16:12 then understood they how
that he bade them not bewar of the leaven of bread, but of the
doctrin of the pharise and of the sadducees.

16:13 when jesu came into the coast of caesarea philippi, he asked
hi disciples, saying, whom do men say that I the son of man am?
16:14 and they said, some say that thou art john the baptist: some,
elias; and others, jeremias, or one of the prophets.

16:15 He saith unto them, but whom say ye that I am?  16:16 and simon
pet answer and said, thou art the christ, the son of the living
god.

16:17 and jesu answer and said unto him, bless art thou, simon
barjona: for flesh and blood hath not reveal it unto thee, but my
fath which is in heaven.

16:18 and I say also unto thee, that thou art peter, and upon this
rock I will build my church; and the gate of hell shall not prevail
against it.

16:19 and I will give unto thee the key of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoev thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoev thou shalt loos on earth shall be loos in heaven.

16:20 then charg he hi discipl that they should tell no man that
h wa jesu the christ.

16:21 from that time forth began jesu to shew unto hi disciples, how
that he must go unto jerusalem, and suffer mani thing of the elders
and chief priest and scribes, and be killed, and be rais again the
third day.

16:22 then peter took him, and began to rebuk him, saying, Be it far
from thee, lord: thi shall not be unto thee.

16:23 but he turned, and said unto peter, get thee behind me, satan:
th art an offenc unto me: for thou savourest not the thing that be
of god, but those that be of men.

16:24 then said jesu unto hi disciples, If ani man will come after
me, let him deni himself, and take up hi cross, and follow me.

16:25 for whosoev will save hi life shall lose it: and whosoever
wil lose hi life for my sake shall find it.

16:26 for what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose hi own soul? or what shall a man give in exchang for his
soul?  16:27 for the son of man shall come in the glori of hi father
with hi angels; and then he shall reward everi man accord to his
works.

16:28 verili I say unto you, there be some stand here, which shall
not tast of death, till they see the son of man come in his
kingdom.

17:1 and after six day jesu taketh peter, james, and john his
brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, 17:2 and
wa transfigur befor them: and hi face did shine as the sun, and
hi raiment wa white as the light.

17:3 and, behold, there appear unto them mose and elia talking
with him.

17:4 then answer peter, and said unto jesus, lord, it is good for us
to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for
thee, and one for moses, and one for elias.

17:5 while he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadow them: and
behold a voic out of the cloud, which said, thi is my belov son,
in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.

17:6 and when the discipl heard it, they fell on their face, and
wer sore afraid.

17:7 and jesu came and touch them, and said, arise, and be not
afraid.

17:8 and when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man, save
jesu only.

17:9 and as they came down from the mountain, jesu charg them,
saying, tell the vision to no man, until the son of man be risen again
from the dead.

17:10 and hi discipl ask him, saying, whi then say the scribes
that elia must first come?  17:11 and jesu answer and said unto
them, elia truli shall first come, and restor all things.

17:12 but I say unto you, that elia is come already, and they knew
him not, but have done unto him whatsoev they listed. likewis shall
also the son of man suffer of them.

17:13 then the discipl understood that he spake unto them of john
th baptist.

17:14 and when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a
certain man, kneel down to him, and saying, 17:15 lord, have mercy
on my son: for he is lunatick, and sore vexed: for ofttim he falleth
into the fire, and oft into the water.

17:16 and I brought him to thi disciples, and they could not cure him.

17:17 then jesu answer and said, O faithless and perverse
generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you?
br him hither to me.

17:18 and jesu rebuk the devil; and he depart out of him: and the
child wa cure from that veri hour.

17:19 then came the discipl to jesu apart, and said, whi could not
w cast him out?  17:20 and jesu said unto them, becaus of your
unbelief: for verili I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, ye shall say unto thi mountain, remov henc to yonder
place; and it shall remove; and noth shall be imposs unto you.

17:21 howbeit thi kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.

17:22 and while they abod in galilee, jesu said unto them, the son
of man shall be betray into the hand of men: 17:23 and they shall
kil him, and the third day he shall be rais again.

and they were exceed sorry.

17:24 and when they were come to capernaum, they that receiv tribute
money came to peter, and said, doth not your master pay tribute?
17:25 He saith, yes. and when he wa come into the house, jesus
prev him, saying, what thinkest thou, simon? of whom do the kings
of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of
strangers?  17:26 peter saith unto him, Of strangers. jesu saith unto
him, then are the children free.

17:27 notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea,
and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when
thou hast open hi mouth, thou shalt find a piec of money: that
take, and give unto them for me and thee.

18:1 At the same time came the discipl unto jesus, saying, who is
th greatest in the kingdom of heaven?  18:2 and jesu call a little
child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, 18:3 and said,
verili I say unto you, except ye be converted, and becom as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

18:4 whosoev therefor shall humbl himself as thi littl child,
th same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

18:5 and whoso shall receiv one such littl child in my name
receiveth me.

18:6 but whoso shall offend one of these littl one which believ in
me, it were better for him that a millston were hang about his
neck, and that he were drown in the depth of the sea.

18:7 woe unto the world becaus of offences! for it must need be that
off come; but woe to that man by whom the offenc cometh!  18:8
wherefor if thi hand or thi foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast
them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather than have two hand or two feet to be cast into
everlast fire.

18:9 and if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather
than have two eye to be cast into hell fire.

18:10 take heed that ye despis not one of these littl ones; for i
say unto you, that in heaven their angel do alway behold the face of
mi father which is in heaven.

18:11 for the son of man is come to save that which wa lost.

18:12 how think ye? if a man have an hundr sheep, and one of them be
gon astray, doth he not leav the nineti and nine, and goeth into the
mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?  18:13 and if so be
that he find it, verili I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that
sheep, than of the nineti and nine which went not astray.

18:14 even so it is not the will of your father which is in heaven,
that one of these littl one should perish.

18:15 moreov if thi brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell
him hi fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou
hast gain thi brother.

18:16 but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three wit everi word may be
established.

18:17 and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church:
but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an
heathen man and a publican.

18:18 verili I say unto you, whatsoev ye shall bind on earth shall
b bound in heaven: and whatsoev ye shall loos on earth shall be
loos in heaven.

18:19 again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agre on earth as
touch ani thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of
mi father which is in heaven.

18:20 for where two or three are gather togeth in my name, there
am I in the midst of them.

18:21 then came peter to him, and said, lord, how oft shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgiv him? till seven times?  18:22 jesus
saith unto him, I say not unto thee, until seven times: but, until
seventi time seven.

18:23 therefor is the kingdom of heaven liken unto a certain king,
which would take account of hi servants.

18:24 and when he had begun to reckon, one wa brought unto him, which
ow him ten thousand talents.

18:25 but forasmuch as he had not to pay, hi lord command him to be
sold, and hi wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to
b made.

18:26 the servant therefor fell down, and worship him, saying,
lord, have patienc with me, and I will pay thee all.

18:27 then the lord of that servant wa move with compassion, and
loos him, and forgav him the debt.

18:28 but the same servant went out, and found one of his
fellowservants, which owe him an hundr pence: and he laid hand on
him, and took him by the throat, saying, pay me that thou owest.

18:29 and hi fellowserv fell down at hi feet, and besought him,
saying, have patienc with me, and I will pay thee all.

18:30 and he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he
should pay the debt.

18:31 So when hi fellowserv saw what wa done, they were very
sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that wa done.

18:32 then hi lord, after that he had call him, said unto him, o
thou wick servant, I forgav thee all that debt, becaus thou
desiredst me: 18:33 shouldest not thou also have had compass on thy
fellowservant, even as I had piti on thee?  18:34 and hi lord was
wroth, and deliv him to the tormentors, till he should pay all
that wa due unto him.

18:35 So likewis shall my heavenli father do also unto you, if ye
from your heart forgiv not everi one hi brother their trespasses.

19:1 and it came to pass, that when jesu had finish these sayings,
h depart from galilee, and came into the coast of judaea beyond
jordan; 19:2 and great multitud follow him; and he heal them
there.

19:3 the pharise also came unto him, tempt him, and say unto
him, Is it law for a man to put away hi wife for everi cause?
19:4 and he answer and said unto them, have ye not read, that he
which made them at the begin made them male and female, 19:5 and
said, for thi caus shall a man leav father and mother, and shall
cleav to hi wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?  19:6 wherefore
they are no more twain, but one flesh. what therefor god hath joined
together, let not man put asunder.

19:7 they say unto him, whi did mose then command to give a writing
of divorcement, and to put her away?  19:8 He saith unto them, moses
becaus of the hard of your heart suffer you to put away your
wives: but from the begin it wa not so.

19:9 and I say unto you, whosoev shall put away hi wife, except it
b for fornication, and shall marri another, committeth adultery: and
whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.

19:10 hi discipl say unto him, If the case of the man be so with
hi wife, it is not good to marry.

19:11 but he said unto them, all men cannot receiv thi saying, save
they to whom it is given.

19:12 for there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their
mother' womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuch of
men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselv eunuch for the
kingdom of heaven' sake. He that is abl to receiv it, let him
rec it.

19:13 then were there brought unto him littl children, that he should
put hi hand on them, and pray: and the discipl rebuk them.

19:14 but jesu said, suffer littl children, and forbid them not, to
com unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

19:15 and he laid hi hand on them, and depart thence.

19:16 and, behold, one came and said unto him, good master, what good
th shall I do, that I may have etern life?  19:17 and he said
unto him, whi callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that
is, god: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.

19:18 He saith unto him, which? jesu said, thou shalt do no murder,
th shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not
bear fals witness, 19:19 honour thi father and thi mother: and, thou
shalt love thi neighbour as thyself.

19:20 the young man saith unto him, all these thing have I kept from
mi youth up: what lack I yet?  19:21 jesu said unto him, If thou wilt
b perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasur in heaven: and come and follow me.

19:22 but when the young man heard that saying, he went away
sorrowful: for he had great possessions.

19:23 then said jesu unto hi disciples, verili I say unto you, that
a rich man shall hardli enter into the kingdom of heaven.

19:24 and again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through
th eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
god.

19:25 when hi discipl heard it, they were exceedingli amazed,
saying, who then can be saved?  19:26 but jesu beheld them, and said
unto them, with men thi is impossible; but with god all thing are
possible.

19:27 then answer peter and said unto him, behold, we have forsaken
all, and follow thee; what shall we have therefore?  19:28 and jesus
said unto them, verili I say unto you, that ye which have follow me,
in the regener when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelv thrones, judg the twelve
trib of israel.

19:29 and everi one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my
name' sake, shall receiv an hundredfold, and shall inherit
everlast life.

19:30 but mani that are first shall be last; and the last shall be
first.

20:1 for the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an
householder, which went out earli in the morn to hire labourers
into hi vineyard.

20:2 and when he had agre with the labour for a penni a day, he
sent them into hi vineyard.

20:3 and he went out about the third hour, and saw other standing
idl in the marketplace, 20:4 and said unto them; Go ye also into the
vineyard, and whatsoev is right I will give you. and they went their
way.

20:5 again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did
likewise.

20:6 and about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others
stand idle, and saith unto them, whi stand ye here all the day
idle?  20:7 they say unto him, becaus no man hath hire us. He saith
unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoev is right, that
shal ye receive.

20:8 So when even wa come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his
steward, call the labourers, and give them their hire, begin from
th last unto the first.

20:9 and when they came that were hire about the eleventh hour, they
receiv everi man a penny.

20:10 but when the first came, they suppos that they should have
receiv more; and they likewis receiv everi man a penny.

20:11 and when they had receiv it, they murmur against the goodman
of the house, 20:12 saying, these last have wrought but one hour, and
thou hast made them equal unto us, which have born the burden and
heat of the day.

20:13 but he answer one of them, and said, friend, I do thee no
wrong: didst not thou agre with me for a penny?  20:14 take that
thin is, and go thi way: I will give unto thi last, even as unto
thee.

20:15 Is it not law for me to do what I will with mine own? is
thin eye evil, becaus I am good?  20:16 So the last shall be first,
and the first last: for mani be called, but few chosen.

20:17 and jesu go up to jerusalem took the twelv discipl apart
in the way, and said unto them, 20:18 behold, we go up to jerusalem;
and the son of man shall be betray unto the chief priest and unto
th scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, 20:19 and shall
deliv him to the gentil to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify
him: and the third day he shall rise again.

20:20 then came to him the mother of zebede children with her sons,
worship him, and desir a certain thing of him.

20:21 and he said unto her, what wilt thou? she saith unto him, grant
that these my two son may sit, the one on thi right hand, and the
oth on the left, in thi kingdom.

20:22 but jesu answer and said, Ye know not what ye ask. are ye
abl to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptiz with? they say unto him, We are
able.

20:23 and he saith unto them, Ye shall drink inde of my cup, and be
bapt with the baptism that I am baptiz with: but to sit on my
right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given
to them for whom it is prepar of my father.

20:24 and when the ten heard it, they were move with indignation
against the two brethren.

20:25 but jesu call them unto him, and said, Ye know that the
princ of the gentil exercis dominion over them, and they that are
great exercis author upon them.

20:26 but it shall not be so among you: but whosoev will be great
among you, let him be your minister; 20:27 and whosoev will be chief
among you, let him be your servant: 20:28 even as the son of man came
not to be minist unto, but to minister, and to give hi life a
ransom for many.

20:29 and as they depart from jericho, a great multitud followed
him.

20:30 and, behold, two blind men sit by the way side, when they
heard that jesu pass by, cri out, saying, have merci on us, o
lord, thou son of david.

20:31 and the multitud rebuk them, becaus they should hold their
peace: but they cri the more, saying, have merci on us, O lord, thou
son of david.

20:32 and jesu stood still, and call them, and said, what will ye
that I shall do unto you?  20:33 they say unto him, lord, that our
ey may be opened.

20:34 So jesu had compass on them, and touch their eyes: and
immedi their eye receiv sight, and they follow him.

21:1 and when they drew nigh unto jerusalem, and were come to
bethphage, unto the mount of olives, then sent jesu two disciples,
21:2 say unto them, Go into the villag over against you, and
straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose
them, and bring them unto me.

21:3 and if ani man say ought unto you, ye shall say, the lord hath
ne of them; and straightway he will send them.

21:4 all thi wa done, that it might be fulfil which wa spoken by
th prophet, saying, 21:5 tell ye the daughter of sion, behold, thy
k cometh unto thee, meek, and sit upon an ass, and a colt the
foal of an ass.

21:6 and the discipl went, and did as jesu command them, 21:7 and
brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they
set him thereon.

21:8 and a veri great multitud spread their garment in the way;
oth cut down branch from the trees, and straw them in the way.

21:9 and the multitud that went before, and that followed, cried,
saying, hosanna to the son of david: bless is he that cometh in the
nam of the lord; hosanna in the highest.

21:10 and when he wa come into jerusalem, all the citi wa moved,
saying, who is this?  21:11 and the multitud said, thi is jesu the
prophet of nazareth of galilee.

21:12 and jesu went into the templ of god, and cast out all them
that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tabl of the
moneychangers, and the seat of them that sold doves, 21:13 and said
unto them, It is written, My hous shall be call the hous of
prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.

21:14 and the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he
heal them.

21:15 and when the chief priest and scribe saw the wonder things
that he did, and the children cri in the temple, and saying,
hosanna to the son of david; they were sore displeased, 21:16 and said
unto him, hearest thou what these say? and jesu saith unto them, yea;
hav ye never read, out of the mouth of babe and suckl thou hast
perfect praise?  21:17 and he left them, and went out of the city
into bethany; and he lodg there.

21:18 now in the morn as he return into the city, he hungered.

21:19 and when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found
noth thereon, but leav only, and said unto it, let no fruit grow
on thee henceforward for ever. and present the fig tree withered
away.

21:20 and when the discipl saw it, they marvelled, saying, how soon
i the fig tree wither away!  21:21 jesu answer and said unto
them, verili I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall
not onli do thi which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye shall
say unto thi mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the
sea; it shall be done.

21:22 and all things, whatsoev ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye
shal receive.

21:23 and when he wa come into the temple, the chief priest and the
eld of the peopl came unto him as he wa teaching, and said, by
what author doest thou these things? and who gave thee this
authority?  21:24 and jesu answer and said unto them, I also will
ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you
bi what author I do these things.

21:25 the baptism of john, whenc wa it? from heaven, or of men? and
they reason with themselves, saying, If we shall say, from heaven;
h will say unto us, whi did ye not then believ him?  21:26 but if we
shal say, Of men; we fear the people; for all hold john as a prophet.

21:27 and they answer jesus, and said, We cannot tell. and he said
unto them, neither tell I you by what author I do these things.

21:28 but what think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to
th first, and said, son, go work to day in my vineyard.

21:29 He answer and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and
went.

21:30 and he came to the second, and said likewise. and he answered
and said, I go, sir: and went not.

21:31 whether of them twain did the will of hi father? they say unto
him, the first. jesu saith unto them, verili I say unto you, that the
publican and the harlot go into the kingdom of god befor you.

21:32 for john came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye
believ him not: but the publican and the harlot believ him: and
ye, when ye had seen it, repent not afterward, that ye might believe
him.

21:33 hear anoth parable: there wa a certain householder, which
plant a vineyard, and hedg it round about, and dig a winepress
in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into
a far country: 21:34 and when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent
hi servant to the husbandmen, that they might receiv the fruit of
it.

21:35 and the husbandmen took hi servants, and beat one, and killed
another, and stone another.

21:36 again, he sent other servant more than the first: and they did
unto them likewise.

21:37 but last of all he sent unto them hi son, saying, they will
rever my son.

21:38 but when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves,
thi is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seiz on his
inheritance.

21:39 and they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew
him.

21:40 when the lord therefor of the vineyard cometh, what will he do
unto those husbandmen?  21:41 they say unto him, He will miserably
destroy those wick men, and will let out hi vineyard unto other
husbandmen, which shall render him the fruit in their seasons.

21:42 jesu saith unto them, did ye never read in the scriptures, the
ston which the builder rejected, the same is becom the head of the
corner: thi is the lord' doing, and it is marvel in our eyes?
21:43 therefor say I unto you, the kingdom of god shall be taken from
you, and given to a nation bring forth the fruit thereof.

21:44 and whosoev shall fall on thi stone shall be broken: but on
whomsoev it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

21:45 and when the chief priest and pharise had heard hi parables,
they perceiv that he spake of them.

21:46 but when they sought to lay hand on him, they fear the
multitude, becaus they took him for a prophet.

22:1 and jesu answer and spake unto them again by parables, and
said, 22:2 the kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which
mad a marriag for hi son, 22:3 and sent forth hi servant to call
them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come.

22:4 again, he sent forth other servants, saying, tell them which are
bidden, behold, I have prepar my dinner: my oxen and my fatl are
killed, and all thing are ready: come unto the marriage.

22:5 but they made light of it, and went their ways, one to hi farm,
anoth to hi merchandise: 22:6 and the remnant took hi servants,
and entreat them spitefully, and slew them.

22:7 but when the king heard thereof, he wa wroth: and he sent forth
hi armies, and destroy those murderers, and burn up their city.

22:8 then saith he to hi servants, the wed is ready, but they
which were bidden were not worthy.

22:9 Go ye therefor into the highways, and as mani as ye shall find,
bid to the marriage.

22:10 So those servant went out into the highways, and gathered
togeth all as mani as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding
wa furnish with guests.

22:11 and when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man
which had not on a wed garment: 22:12 and he saith unto him,
friend, how camest thou in hither not have a wed garment? and he
wa speechless.

22:13 then said the king to the servants, bind him hand and foot, and
tak him away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be
weep and gnash of teeth.

22:14 for mani are called, but few are chosen.

22:15 then went the pharisees, and took counsel how they might
entangl him in hi talk.

22:16 and they sent out unto him their discipl with the herodians,
saying, master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of
god in truth, neither carest thou for ani man: for thou regardest not
th person of men.

22:17 tell us therefore, what thinkest thou? Is it law to give
tribut unto caesar, or not?  22:18 but jesu perceiv their
wickedness, and said, whi tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?  22:19 shew me
th tribut money. and they brought unto him a penny.

22:20 and he saith unto them, whose is thi imag and superscription?
22:21 they say unto him, caesar's. then saith he unto them, render
therefor unto caesar the thing which are caesar's; and unto god the
th that are god's.

22:22 when they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him,
and went their way.

22:23 the same day came to him the sadducees, which say that there is
no resurrection, and ask him, 22:24 saying, master, mose said, If a
man die, have no children, hi brother shall marri hi wife, and
rais up seed unto hi brother.

22:25 now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he
had marri a wife, deceased, and, have no issue, left hi wife unto
hi brother: 22:26 likewis the second also, and the third, unto the
seventh.

22:27 and last of all the woman die also.

22:28 therefor in the resurrect whose wife shall she be of the
seven?  for they all had her.

22:29 jesu answer and said unto them, Ye do err, not know the
scriptures, nor the power of god.

22:30 for in the resurrect they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angel of god in heaven.

22:31 but as touch the resurrect of the dead, have ye not read
that which wa spoken unto you by god, saying, 22:32 I am the god of
abraham, and the god of isaac, and the god of jacob?  god is not the
god of the dead, but of the living.

22:33 and when the multitud heard this, they were astonish at his
doctrine.

22:34 but when the pharise had heard that he had put the sadducees
to silence, they were gather together.

22:35 then one of them, which wa a lawyer, ask him a question,
tempt him, and saying, 22:36 master, which is the great commandment
in the law?  22:37 jesu said unto him, thou shalt love the lord thy
god with all thi heart, and with all thi soul, and with all thi mind.

22:38 thi is the first and great commandment.

22:39 and the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thi neighbour as
thyself.

22:40 On these two command hang all the law and the prophets.

22:41 while the pharise were gather together, jesu ask them,
22:42 saying, what think ye of christ? whose son is he? they say unto
him, the son of david.

22:43 He saith unto them, how then doth david in spirit call him lord,
saying, 22:44 the lord said unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand,
til I make thine enemi thi footstool?  22:45 If david then call him
lord, how is he hi son?  22:46 and no man wa abl to answer him a
word, neither durst ani man from that day forth ask him ani more
questions.

23:1 then spake jesu to the multitude, and to hi disciples, 23:2
say the scribe and the pharise sit in moses' seat: 23:3 all
therefor whatsoev they bid you observe, that observ and do; but do
not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.

23:4 for they bind heavi burden and grievou to be borne, and lay
them on men' shoulders; but they themselv will not move them with
on of their fingers.

23:5 but all their work they do for to be seen of men: they make
broad their phylacteries, and enlarg the border of their garments,
23:6 and love the uppermost room at feasts, and the chief seat in
th synagogues, 23:7 and greet in the markets, and to be call of
men, rabbi, rabbi.

23:8 but be not ye call rabbi: for one is your master, even christ;
and all ye are brethren.

23:9 and call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your
father, which is in heaven.

23:10 neither be ye call masters: for one is your master, even
christ.

23:11 but he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.

23:12 and whosoev shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that
shal humbl himself shall be exalted.

23:13 but woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut
up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves,
neith suffer ye them that are enter to go in.

23:14 woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour
widows' houses, and for a pretenc make long prayer: therefor ye
shal receiv the greater damnation.

23:15 woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass
sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him
twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.

23:16 woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, whosoev shall swear
bi the temple, it is nothing; but whosoev shall swear by the gold of
th temple, he is a debtor!  23:17 Ye fool and blind: for whether is
greater, the gold, or the templ that sanctifieth the gold?  23:18
and, whosoev shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever
sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.

23:19 Ye fool and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the
altar that sanctifieth the gift?  23:20 whoso therefor shall swear by
th altar, sweareth by it, and by all thing thereon.

23:21 and whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him
that dwelleth therein.

23:22 and he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of
god, and by him that sitteth thereon.

23:23 woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay
tith of mint and anis and cummin, and have omit the weightier
matt of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have
done, and not to leav the other undone.

23:24 Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.

23:25 woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make
clean the outsid of the cup and of the platter, but within they are
ful of extort and excess.

23:26 thou blind pharisee, cleans first that which is within the cup
and platter, that the outsid of them may be clean also.

23:27 woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like
unto white sepulchres, which inde appear beauti outward, but are
within full of dead men' bones, and of all uncleanness.

23:28 even so ye also outwardli appear righteou unto men, but within
y are full of hypocrisi and iniquity.

23:29 woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! becaus ye
build the tomb of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchr of the
righteous, 23:30 and say, If we had been in the day of our fathers,
w would not have been partak with them in the blood of the
prophets.

23:31 wherefor ye be wit unto yourselves, that ye are the
children of them which kill the prophets.

23:32 fill ye up then the measur of your fathers.

23:33 Ye serpents, ye gener of vipers, how can ye escap the
damn of hell?  23:34 wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets,
and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill and crucify;
and some of them shall ye scourg in your synagogues, and persecute
them from citi to city: 23:35 that upon you may come all the righteous
blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteou abel unto the
blood of zacharia son of barachias, whom ye slew between the temple
and the altar.

23:36 verili I say unto you, all these thing shall come upon this
generation.

23:37 O jerusalem, jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered
thi children together, even as a hen gathereth her chicken under her
wings, and ye would not!  23:38 behold, your hous is left unto you
desolate.

23:39 for I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye
shal say, bless is he that cometh in the name of the lord.

24:1 and jesu went out, and depart from the temple: and his
discipl came to him for to shew him the build of the temple.

24:2 and jesu said unto them, see ye not all these things? verili i
say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down.

24:3 and as he sat upon the mount of olives, the discipl came unto
him privately, saying, tell us, when shall these thing be? and what
shal be the sign of thi coming, and of the end of the world?  24:4
and jesu answer and said unto them, take heed that no man deceive
you.

24:5 for mani shall come in my name, saying, I am christ; and shall
dec many.

24:6 and ye shall hear of war and rumour of wars: see that ye be not
troubled: for all these thing must come to pass, but the end is not
yet.

24:7 for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes,
in diver places.

24:8 all these are the begin of sorrows.

24:9 then shall they deliv you up to be afflicted, and shall kill
you: and ye shall be hate of all nation for my name' sake.

24:10 and then shall mani be offended, and shall betray one another,
and shall hate one another.

24:11 and mani fals prophet shall rise, and shall deceiv many.

24:12 and becaus iniqu shall abound, the love of mani shall wax
cold.

24:13 but he that shall endur unto the end, the same shall be saved.

24:14 and thi gospel of the kingdom shall be preach in all the
world for a wit unto all nations; and then shall the end come.

24:15 when ye therefor shall see the abomin of desolation,
spoken of by daniel the prophet, stand in the holi place, (whoso
readeth, let him understand:) 24:16 then let them which be in judaea
fle into the mountains: 24:17 let him which is on the housetop not
com down to take ani thing out of hi house: 24:18 neither let him
which is in the field return back to take hi clothes.

24:19 and woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give
suck in those days!  24:20 but pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter, neither on the sabbath day: 24:21 for then shall be great
tribulation, such as wa not sinc the begin of the world to this
time, no, nor ever shall be.

24:22 and except those day should be shortened, there should no flesh
b saved: but for the elect' sake those day shall be shortened.

24:23 then if ani man shall say unto you, lo, here is christ, or
there; believ it not.

24:24 for there shall aris fals christs, and fals prophets, and
shal shew great sign and wonders; insomuch that, if it were
possible, they shall deceiv the veri elect.

24:25 behold, I have told you before.

24:26 wherefor if they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the
desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believ it
not.

24:27 for as the lightn cometh out of the east, and shineth even
unto the west; so shall also the come of the son of man be.

24:28 for wheresoev the carcas is, there will the eagl be
gath together.

24:29 immedi after the tribul of those day shall the sun be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the star shall
fal from heaven, and the power of the heaven shall be shaken: 24:30
and then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven: and then
shal all the tribe of the earth mourn, and they shall see the son of
man come in the cloud of heaven with power and great glory.

24:31 and he shall send hi angel with a great sound of a trumpet,
and they shall gather togeth hi elect from the four winds, from one
end of heaven to the other.

24:32 now learn a parabl of the fig tree; when hi branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: 24:33
so likewis ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is
near, even at the doors.

24:34 verili I say unto you, thi gener shall not pass, till all
thes thing be fulfilled.

24:35 heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass
away.

24:36 but of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angel of
heaven, but my father only.

24:37 but as the day of noe were, so shall also the come of the son
of man be.

24:38 for as in the day that were befor the flood they were eating
and drinking, marri and give in marriage, until the day that noe
ent into the ark, 24:39 and knew not until the flood came, and
took them all away; so shall also the come of the son of man be.

24:40 then shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the
oth left.

24:41 two women shall be grind at the mill; the one shall be taken,
and the other left.

24:42 watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your lord doth come.

24:43 but know this, that if the goodman of the hous had known in
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not
hav suffer hi hous to be broken up.

24:44 therefor be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not
th son of man cometh.

24:45 who then is a faith and wise servant, whom hi lord hath made
rul over hi household, to give them meat in due season?  24:46
bless is that servant, whom hi lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.

24:47 verili I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his
goods.

24:48 but and if that evil servant shall say in hi heart, My lord
delayeth hi coming; 24:49 and shall begin to smite his
fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; 24:50 the lord
of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and
in an hour that he is not awar of, 24:51 and shall cut him asunder,
and appoint him hi portion with the hypocrites: there shall be
weep and gnash of teeth.

25:1 then shall the kingdom of heaven be liken unto ten virgins,
which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.

25:2 and five of them were wise, and five were foolish.

25:3 they that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with
them: 25:4 but the wise took oil in their vessel with their lamps.

25:5 while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumber and slept.

25:6 and at midnight there wa a cri made, behold, the bridegroom
cometh; go ye out to meet him.

25:7 then all those virgin arose, and trim their lamps.

25:8 and the foolish said unto the wise, give us of your oil; for our
lamp are gone out.

25:9 but the wise answered, saying, not so; lest there be not enough
for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves.

25:10 and while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that
wer readi went in with him to the marriage: and the door wa shut.

25:11 afterward came also the other virgins, saying, lord, lord, open
to us.

25:12 but he answer and said, verili I say unto you, I know you not.

25:13 watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour
wherein the son of man cometh.

25:14 for the kingdom of heaven is as a man travel into a far
country, who call hi own servants, and deliv unto them his
goods.

25:15 and unto one he gave five talents, to anoth two, and to
anoth one; to everi man accord to hi sever ability; and
straightway took hi journey.

25:16 then he that had receiv the five talent went and trade with
th same, and made them other five talents.

25:17 and likewis he that had receiv two, he also gain other two.

25:18 but he that had receiv one went and dig in the earth, and
hid hi lord' money.

25:19 after a long time the lord of those servant cometh, and
reckoneth with them.

25:20 and so he that had receiv five talent came and brought other
f talents, saying, lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents:
behold, I have gain besid them five talent more.

25:21 hi lord said unto him, well done, thou good and faithful
servant: thou hast been faith over a few things, I will make thee
rul over mani things: enter thou into the joy of thi lord.

25:22 He also that had receiv two talent came and said, lord, thou
deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gain two other
tal besid them.

25:23 hi lord said unto him, well done, good and faith servant;
th hast been faith over a few things, I will make thee ruler over
mani things: enter thou into the joy of thi lord.

25:24 then he which had receiv the one talent came and said, lord, i
knew thee that thou art an hard man, reap where thou hast not sown,
and gather where thou hast not strawed: 25:25 and I wa afraid, and
went and hid thi talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is
thine.

25:26 hi lord answer and said unto him, thou wick and slothful
servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sow not, and gather where
i have not strawed: 25:27 thou oughtest therefor to have put my money
to the exchangers, and then at my come I should have receiv mine
own with usury.

25:28 take therefor the talent from him, and give it unto him which
hath ten talents.

25:29 for unto everi one that hath shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that
which he hath.

25:30 and cast ye the unprofit servant into outer darkness: there
shal be weep and gnash of teeth.

25:31 when the son of man shall come in hi glory, and all the holy
angel with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of hi glory: 25:32
and befor him shall be gather all nations: and he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth hi sheep from the
goats: 25:33 and he shall set the sheep on hi right hand, but the
goat on the left.

25:34 then shall the king say unto them on hi right hand, come, ye
bless of my father, inherit the kingdom prepar for you from the
found of the world: 25:35 for I wa an hungred, and ye gave me
meat: I wa thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I wa a stranger, and ye
took me in: 25:36 naked, and ye cloth me: I wa sick, and ye visited
me: I wa in prison, and ye came unto me.

25:37 then shall the righteou answer him, saying, lord, when saw we
the an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?  25:38
when saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed
thee?  25:39 Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto
thee?  25:40 and the king shall answer and say unto them, verili I say
unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these
mi brethren, ye have done it unto me.

25:41 then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlast fire, prepar for the devil and his
angels: 25:42 for I wa an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: 25:43 I wa a stranger, and ye took
m not in: naked, and ye cloth me not: sick, and in prison, and ye
visit me not.

25:44 then shall they also answer him, saying, lord, when saw we thee
an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and did not minist unto thee?  25:45 then shall he answer
them, saying, verili I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one
of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

25:46 and these shall go away into everlast punishment: but the
right into life eternal.

26:1 and it came to pass, when jesu had finish all these sayings,
h said unto hi disciples, 26:2 Ye know that after two day is the
feast of the passover, and the son of man is betray to be crucified.

26:3 then assembl togeth the chief priests, and the scribes, and
th elder of the people, unto the palac of the high priest, who was
cal caiaphas, 26:4 and consult that they might take jesu by
subtilty, and kill him.

26:5 but they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar
among the people.

26:6 now when jesu wa in bethany, in the hous of simon the leper,
26:7 there came unto him a woman have an alabast box of very
preci ointment, and pour it on hi head, as he sat at meat.

26:8 but when hi discipl saw it, they had indignation, saying, to
what purpos is thi waste?  26:9 for thi ointment might have been
sold for much, and given to the poor.

26:10 when jesu understood it, he said unto them, whi troubl ye the
woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.

26:11 for ye have the poor alway with you; but me ye have not always.

26:12 for in that she hath pour thi ointment on my body, she did it
for my burial.

26:13 verili I say unto you, wheresoev thi gospel shall be preached
in the whole world, there shall also this, that thi woman hath done,
b told for a memori of her.

26:14 then one of the twelve, call juda iscariot, went unto the
chief priests, 26:15 and said unto them, what will ye give me, and i
wil deliv him unto you? and they coven with him for thirty
piec of silver.

26:16 and from that time he sought opportun to betray him.

26:17 now the first day of the feast of unleaven bread the disciples
cam to jesus, say unto him, where wilt thou that we prepar for
the to eat the passover?  26:18 and he said, Go into the citi to such
a man, and say unto him, the master saith, My time is at hand; I will
keep the passov at thi hous with my disciples.

26:19 and the discipl did as jesu had appoint them; and they made
readi the passover.

26:20 now when the even wa come, he sat down with the twelve.

26:21 and as they did eat, he said, verili I say unto you, that one of
you shall betray me.

26:22 and they were exceed sorrowful, and began everi one of them
to say unto him, lord, is it I?  26:23 and he answer and said, he
that dippeth hi hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.

26:24 the son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that
man by whom the son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man
if he had not been born.

26:25 then judas, which betray him, answer and said, master, is it
i?  He said unto him, thou hast said.

26:26 and as they were eating, jesu took bread, and bless it, and
brak it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, take, eat; thi is
mi body.

26:27 and he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, drink ye all of it; 26:28 for thi is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for mani for the remiss of sins.

26:29 but I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of thi fruit of
th vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my father's
kingdom.

26:30 and when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
olives.

26:31 then saith jesu unto them, all ye shall be offend becaus of
m thi night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep of the flock shall be scatter abroad.

26:32 but after I am risen again, I will go befor you into galilee.

26:33 peter answer and said unto him, though all men shall be
offend becaus of thee, yet will I never be offended.

26:34 jesu said unto him, verili I say unto thee, that thi night,
befor the cock crow, thou shalt deni me thrice.

26:35 peter said unto him, though I should die with thee, yet will i
not deni thee. likewis also said all the disciples.

26:36 then cometh jesu with them unto a place call gethsemane, and
saith unto the disciples, sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.

26:37 and he took with him peter and the two son of zebedee, and
began to be sorrow and veri heavy.

26:38 then saith he unto them, My soul is exceed sorrowful, even
unto death: tarri ye here, and watch with me.

26:39 and he went a littl farther, and fell on hi face, and prayed,
saying, O my father, if it be possible, let thi cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.

26:40 and he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and
saith unto peter, what, could ye not watch with me one hour?  26:41
watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed
i willing, but the flesh is weak.

26:42 He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my
father, if thi cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy
wil be done.

26:43 and he came and found them asleep again: for their eye were
heavy.

26:44 and he left them, and went away again, and pray the third
time, say the same words.

26:45 then cometh he to hi disciples, and saith unto them, sleep on
now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the son of
man is betray into the hand of sinners.

26:46 rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray
me.

26:47 and while he yet spake, lo, judas, one of the twelve, came, and
with him a great multitud with sword and staves, from the chief
priest and elder of the people.

26:48 now he that betray him gave them a sign, saying, whomsoev i
shal kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.

26:49 and forthwith he came to jesus, and said, hail, master; and
kiss him.

26:50 and jesu said unto him, friend, wherefor art thou come? then
cam they, and laid hand on jesu and took him.

26:51 and, behold, one of them which were with jesu stretch out his
hand, and drew hi sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's,
and smote off hi ear.

26:52 then said jesu unto him, put up again thi sword into hi place:
for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.

26:53 thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my father, and he shall
pres give me more than twelv legion of angels?  26:54 but how
then shall the scriptur be fulfilled, that thu it must be?  26:55
in that same hour said jesu to the multitudes, are ye come out as
against a thief with sword and stave for to take me? I sat daily
with you teach in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

26:56 but all thi wa done, that the scriptur of the prophet might
b fulfilled. then all the discipl forsook him, and fled.

26:57 and they that had laid hold on jesu led him away to caiaphas
th high priest, where the scribe and the elder were assembled.

26:58 but peter follow him afar off unto the high priest' palace,
and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.

26:59 now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought
fals wit against jesus, to put him to death; 26:60 but found
none: yea, though mani fals wit came, yet found they none. at
th last came two fals witnesses, 26:61 and said, thi fellow said, i
am abl to destroy the templ of god, and to build it in three days.

26:62 and the high priest arose, and said unto him, answerest thou
nothing? what is it which these wit against thee?  26:63 but jesus
held hi peace, and the high priest answer and said unto him, i
adjur thee by the live god, that thou tell us whether thou be the
christ, the son of god.

26:64 jesu saith unto him, thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto
you, hereaft shall ye see the son of man sit on the right hand
of power, and come in the cloud of heaven.

26:65 then the high priest rent hi clothes, saying, He hath spoken
blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have
heard hi blasphemy.

26:66 what think ye? they answer and said, He is guilti of death.

26:67 then did they spit in hi face, and buffet him; and others
smot him with the palm of their hands, 26:68 saying, prophesi unto
us, thou christ, who is he that smote thee?  26:69 now peter sat
without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, thou also
wast with jesu of galilee.

26:70 but he deni befor them all, saying, I know not what thou
sayest.

26:71 and when he wa gone out into the porch, anoth maid saw him,
and said unto them that were there, thi fellow wa also with jesu of
nazareth.

26:72 and again he deni with an oath, I do not know the man.

26:73 and after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to
peter, sure thou also art one of them; for thi speech bewrayeth
thee.

26:74 then began he to curs and to swear, saying, I know not the man.
and immedi the cock crew.

26:75 and peter rememb the word of jesus, which said unto him,
befor the cock crow, thou shalt deni me thrice. and he went out, and
wept bitterly.

27:1 when the morn wa come, all the chief priest and elder of
th peopl took counsel against jesu to put him to death: 27:2 and
when they had bound him, they led him away, and deliv him to
pontiu pilat the governor.

27:3 then judas, which had betray him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repent himself, and brought again the thirti piec of
silv to the chief priest and elders, 27:4 saying, I have sin in
that I have betray the innoc blood. and they said, what is that
to us? see thou to that.

27:5 and he cast down the piec of silver in the temple, and
departed, and went and hang himself.

27:6 and the chief priest took the silver pieces, and said, It is not
law for to put them into the treasury, becaus it is the price of
blood.

27:7 and they took counsel, and bought with them the potter' field,
to buri stranger in.

27:8 wherefor that field wa called, the field of blood, unto this
day.

27:9 then wa fulfil that which wa spoken by jeremi the prophet,
saying, and they took the thirti piec of silver, the price of him
that wa valued, whom they of the children of israel did value; 27:10
and gave them for the potter' field, as the lord appoint me.

27:11 and jesu stood befor the governor: and the governor ask him,
saying, art thou the king of the jews? and jesu said unto him, thou
sayest.

27:12 and when he wa accus of the chief priest and elders, he
answ nothing.

27:13 then said pilat unto him, hearest thou not how mani thing they
wit against thee?  27:14 and he answer him to never a word;
insomuch that the governor marvel greatly.

27:15 now at that feast the governor wa wont to releas unto the
peopl a prisoner, whom they would.

27:16 and they had then a notabl prisoner, call barabbas.

27:17 therefor when they were gather together, pilat said unto
them, whom will ye that I releas unto you? barabbas, or jesu which
i call christ?  27:18 for he knew that for envi they had delivered
him.

27:19 when he wa set down on the judgment seat, hi wife sent unto
him, saying, have thou noth to do with that just man: for I have
suff mani thing thi day in a dream becaus of him.

27:20 but the chief priest and elder persuad the multitud that
they should ask barabbas, and destroy jesus.

27:21 the governor answer and said unto them, whether of the twain
wil ye that I releas unto you? they said, barabbas.

27:22 pilat saith unto them, what shall I do then with jesu which is
cal christ? they all say unto him, let him be crucified.

27:23 and the governor said, why, what evil hath he done? but they
cri out the more, saying, let him be crucified.

27:24 when pilat saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a
tumult wa made, he took water, and wash hi hand befor the
multitude, saying, I am innoc of the blood of thi just person: see
y to it.

27:25 then answer all the people, and said, hi blood be on us, and
on our children.

27:26 then releas he barabba unto them: and when he had scourged
jesus, he deliv him to be crucified.

27:27 then the soldier of the governor took jesu into the common
hall, and gather unto him the whole band of soldiers.

27:28 and they strip him, and put on him a scarlet robe.

27:29 and when they had plat a crown of thorns, they put it upon
hi head, and a reed in hi right hand: and they bow the knee before
him, and mock him, saying, hail, king of the jews!  27:30 and they
spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.

27:31 and after that they had mock him, they took the robe off from
him, and put hi own raiment on him, and led him away to crucifi him.

27:32 and as they came out, they found a man of cyrene, simon by name:
him they compel to bear hi cross.

27:33 and when they were come unto a place call golgotha, that is to
say, a place of a skull, 27:34 they gave him vinegar to drink mingled
with gall: and when he had tast thereof, he would not drink.

27:35 and they crucifi him, and part hi garments, cast lots:
that it might be fulfil which wa spoken by the prophet, they
part my garment among them, and upon my vestur did they cast lots.

27:36 and sit down they watch him there; 27:37 and set up over
hi head hi accus written, thi IS jesu the king OF the jews.

27:38 then were there two thiev crucifi with him, one on the right
hand, and anoth on the left.

27:39 and they that pass by revil him, wag their heads, 27:40
and saying, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thyself. If thou be the son of god, come down from the
cross.

27:41 likewis also the chief priest mock him, with the scribes
and elders, said, 27:42 He save others; himself he cannot save. If he
b the king of israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we
wil believ him.

27:43 He trust in god; let him deliv him now, if he will have him:
for he said, I am the son of god.

27:44 the thiev also, which were crucifi with him, cast the same
in hi teeth.

27:45 now from the sixth hour there wa dark over all the land
unto the ninth hour.

27:46 and about the ninth hour jesu cri with a loud voice, saying,
eli, eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My god, my god, whi hast
thou forsaken me?  27:47 some of them that stood there, when they
heard that, said, thi man calleth for elias.

27:48 and straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled
it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.

27:49 the rest said, let be, let us see whether elia will come to
sav him.

27:50 jesus, when he had cri again with a loud voice, yield up the
ghost.

27:51 and, behold, the veil of the templ wa rent in twain from the
top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rock rent; 27:52
and the grave were opened; and mani bodi of the saint which slept
arose, 27:53 and came out of the grave after hi resurrection, and
went into the holi city, and appear unto many.

27:54 now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching
jesus, saw the earthquake, and those thing that were done, they
fear greatly, saying, truli thi wa the son of god.

27:55 and mani women were there behold afar off, which followed
jesu from galilee, minist unto him: 27:56 among which wa mary
magdalene, and mari the mother of jame and joses, and the mother of
zebede children.

27:57 when the even wa come, there came a rich man of arimathaea,
nam joseph, who also himself wa jesus' disciple: 27:58 He went to
pilate, and beg the bodi of jesus. then pilat command the body
to be delivered.

27:59 and when joseph had taken the body, he wrap it in a clean
linen cloth, 27:60 and laid it in hi own new tomb, which he had hewn
out in the rock: and he roll a great stone to the door of the
sepulchre, and departed.

27:61 and there wa mari magdalene, and the other mary, sit over
against the sepulchre.

27:62 now the next day, that follow the day of the preparation, the
chief priest and pharise came togeth unto pilate, 27:63 saying,
sir, we rememb that that deceiv said, while he wa yet alive,
aft three day I will rise again.

27:64 command therefor that the sepulchr be made sure until the
third day, lest hi discipl come by night, and steal him away, and
say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error
shal be wors than the first.

27:65 pilat said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make it as
sur as ye can.

27:66 So they went, and made the sepulchr sure, seal the stone,
and set a watch.

28:1 In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first
day of the week, came mari magdalen and the other mari to see the
sepulchre.

28:2 and, behold, there wa a great earthquake: for the angel of the
lord descend from heaven, and came and roll back the stone from
th door, and sat upon it.

28:3 hi counten wa like lightning, and hi raiment white as
snow: 28:4 and for fear of him the keeper did shake, and becam as
dead men.

28:5 and the angel answer and said unto the women, fear not ye: for
i know that ye seek jesus, which wa crucified.

28:6 He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. come, see the place
wher the lord lay.

28:7 and go quickly, and tell hi discipl that he is risen from the
dead; and, behold, he goeth befor you into galilee; there shall ye
se him: lo, I have told you.

28:8 and they depart quickli from the sepulchr with fear and great
joy; and did run to bring hi discipl word.

28:9 and as they went to tell hi disciples, behold, jesu met them,
saying, all hail. and they came and held him by the feet, and
worship him.

28:10 then said jesu unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren
that they go into galilee, and there shall they see me.

28:11 now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into
th city, and shew unto the chief priest all the thing that were
done.

28:12 and when they were assembl with the elders, and had taken
counsel, they gave larg money unto the soldiers, 28:13 saying, say
ye, hi discipl came by night, and stole him away while we slept.

28:14 and if thi come to the governor' ears, we will persuad him,
and secur you.

28:15 So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this
say is commonli report among the jew until thi day.

28:16 then the eleven discipl went away into galilee, into a
mountain where jesu had appoint them.

28:17 and when they saw him, they worship him: but some doubted.

28:18 and jesu came and spake unto them, saying, all power is given
unto me in heaven and in earth.

28:19 Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptiz them in the
nam of the father, and of the son, and of the holi ghost: 28:20
teach them to observ all thing whatsoev I have command you:
and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. amen.




th gospel accord to saint mark


1:1 the begin of the gospel of jesu christ, the son of god; 1:2
a it is written in the prophets, behold, I send my messeng before
thi face, which shall prepar thi way befor thee.

1:3 the voic of one cri in the wilderness, prepar ye the way of
th lord, make hi path straight.

1:4 john did baptiz in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repent for the remiss of sins.

1:5 and there went out unto him all the land of judaea, and they of
jerusalem, and were all baptiz of him in the river of jordan,
confess their sins.

1:6 and john wa cloth with camel' hair, and with a girdl of a
skin about hi loins; and he did eat locust and wild honey; 1:7 and
preached, saying, there cometh one mightier than I after me, the
latchet of whose shoe I am not worthi to stoop down and unloose.

1:8 I inde have baptiz you with water: but he shall baptiz you
with the holi ghost.

1:9 and it came to pass in those days, that jesu came from nazareth
of galilee, and wa baptiz of john in jordan.

1:10 and straightway come up out of the water, he saw the heavens
opened, and the spirit like a dove descend upon him: 1:11 and there
cam a voic from heaven, saying, thou art my belov son, in whom i
am well pleased.

1:12 and immedi the spirit driveth him into the wilderness.

1:13 and he wa there in the wilder forti days, tempt of satan;
and wa with the wild beasts; and the angel minist unto him.

1:14 now after that john wa put in prison, jesu came into galilee,
preach the gospel of the kingdom of god, 1:15 and saying, the time
i fulfilled, and the kingdom of god is at hand: repent ye, and
believ the gospel.

1:16 now as he walk by the sea of galilee, he saw simon and andrew
hi brother cast a net into the sea: for they were fishers.

1:17 and jesu said unto them, come ye after me, and I will make you
to becom fisher of men.

1:18 and straightway they forsook their nets, and follow him.

1:19 and when he had gone a littl farther thence, he saw jame the
son of zebedee, and john hi brother, who also were in the ship
mend their nets.

1:20 and straightway he call them: and they left their father
zebede in the ship with the hire servants, and went after him.

1:21 and they went into capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day
h enter into the synagogue, and taught.

1:22 and they were astonish at hi doctrine: for he taught them as
on that had authority, and not as the scribes.

1:23 and there wa in their synagogu a man with an unclean spirit;
and he cri out, 1:24 saying, let us alone; what have we to do with
thee, thou jesu of nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee
who thou art, the holi one of god.

1:25 and jesu rebuk him, saying, hold thi peace, and come out of
him.

1:26 and when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cri with a loud
voice, he came out of him.

1:27 and they were all amazed, insomuch that they question among
themselves, saying, what thing is this? what new doctrin is this? for
with author commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him.

1:28 and immedi hi fame spread abroad throughout all the region
round about galilee.

1:29 and forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they
ent into the hous of simon and andrew, with jame and john.

1:30 but simon' wife' mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell
him of her.

1:31 and he came and took her by the hand, and lift her up; and
immedi the fever left her, and she minist unto them.

1:32 and at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that
wer diseased, and them that were possess with devils.

1:33 and all the citi wa gather togeth at the door.

1:34 and he heal mani that were sick of diver diseases, and cast
out mani devils; and suffer not the devil to speak, becaus they
knew him.

1:35 and in the morning, rise up a great while befor day, he went
out, and depart into a solitari place, and there prayed.

1:36 and simon and they that were with him follow after him.

1:37 and when they had found him, they said unto him, all men seek for
thee.

1:38 and he said unto them, let us go into the next towns, that I may
preach there also: for therefor came I forth.

1:39 and he preach in their synagogu throughout all galilee, and
cast out devils.

1:40 and there came a leper to him, beseech him, and kneel down
to him, and say unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

1:41 and jesus, move with compassion, put forth hi hand, and touched
him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean.

1:42 and as soon as he had spoken, immedi the leprosi departed
from him, and he wa cleansed.

1:43 and he straitli charg him, and forthwith sent him away; 1:44
and saith unto him, see thou say noth to ani man: but go thi way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thi cleans those things
which mose commanded, for a testimoni unto them.

1:45 but he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze
abroad the matter, insomuch that jesu could no more openli enter into
th city, but wa without in desert places: and they came to him from
everi quarter.

2:1 and again he enter into capernaum after some days; and it was
nois that he wa in the house.

2:2 and straightway mani were gather together, insomuch that there
wa no room to receiv them, no, not so much as about the door: and he
preach the word unto them.

2:3 and they come unto him, bring one sick of the palsy, which was
born of four.

2:4 and when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they
uncov the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they
let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsi lay.

2:5 when jesu saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy,
son, thi sin be forgiven thee.

2:6 but there wa certain of the scribe sit there, and reasoning
in their hearts, 2:7 whi doth thi man thu speak blasphemies? who can
forg sin but god only?  2:8 and immedi when jesu perceived
in hi spirit that they so reason within themselves, he said unto
them, whi reason ye these thing in your hearts?  2:9 whether is it
easi to say to the sick of the palsy, thi sin be forgiven thee; or
to say, arise, and take up thi bed, and walk?  2:10 but that ye may
know that the son of man hath power on earth to forgiv sins, (he
saith to the sick of the palsy,) 2:11 I say unto thee, arise, and take
up thi bed, and go thi way into thine house.

2:12 and immedi he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before
them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorifi god,
saying, We never saw it on thi fashion.

2:13 and he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude
resort unto him, and he taught them.

2:14 and as he pass by, he saw levi the son of alphaeu sit at
th receipt of custom, and said unto him, follow me. and he aros and
follow him.

2:15 and it came to pass, that, as jesu sat at meat in hi house,
mani publican and sinner sat also togeth with jesu and his
disciples: for there were many, and they follow him.

2:16 and when the scribe and pharise saw him eat with publican and
sinners, they said unto hi disciples, how is it that he eateth and
drinketh with publican and sinners?  2:17 when jesu heard it, he
saith unto them, they that are whole have no need of the physician,
but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance.

2:18 and the discipl of john and of the pharise use to fast: and
they come and say unto him, whi do the discipl of john and of the
pharise fast, but thi discipl fast not?  2:19 and jesu said unto
them, can the children of the bridechamb fast, while the bridegroom
i with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they
cannot fast.

2:20 but the day will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

2:21 No man also seweth a piec of new cloth on an old garment: else
th new piec that fill it up taketh away from the old, and the rent
i made worse.

2:22 and no man putteth new wine into old bottles: els the new wine
doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottl will
b marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles.

2:23 and it came to pass, that he went through the corn field on the
sabbath day; and hi discipl began, as they went, to pluck the ears
of corn.

2:24 and the pharise said unto him, behold, whi do they on the
sabbath day that which is not lawful?  2:25 and he said unto them,
hav ye never read what david did, when he had need, and wa an
hungred, he, and they that were with him?  2:26 how he went into the
hous of god in the day of abiathar the high priest, and did eat the
shewbread, which is not law to eat but for the priests, and gave
also to them which were with him?  2:27 and he said unto them, the
sabbath wa made for man, and not man for the sabbath: 2:28 therefore
th son of man is lord also of the sabbath.

3:1 and he enter again into the synagogue; and there wa a man there
which had a wither hand.

3:2 and they watch him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath
day; that they might accus him.

3:3 and he saith unto the man which had the wither hand, stand
forth.

3:4 and he saith unto them, Is it law to do good on the sabbath
days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? but they held their
peace.

3:5 and when he had look round about on them with anger, being
griev for the hard of their hearts, he saith unto the man,
stretch forth thine hand. and he stretch it out: and hi hand was
restor whole as the other.

3:6 and the pharise went forth, and straightway took counsel with
th herodian against him, how they might destroy him.

3:7 but jesu withdrew himself with hi discipl to the sea: and a
great multitud from galile follow him, and from judaea, 3:8 and
from jerusalem, and from idumaea, and from beyond jordan; and they
about tyre and sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what
great thing he did, came unto him.

3:9 and he spake to hi disciples, that a small ship should wait on
him becaus of the multitude, lest they should throng him.

3:10 for he had heal many; insomuch that they press upon him for
to touch him, as mani as had plagues.

3:11 and unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down befor him, and
cried, saying, thou art the son of god.

3:12 and he straitli charg them that they should not make him known.

3:13 and he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he
would: and they came unto him.

3:14 and he ordain twelve, that they should be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach, 3:15 and to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 3:16 and simon he surnam peter;
3:17 and jame the son of zebedee, and john the brother of james; and
h surnam them boanerges, which is, the son of thunder: 3:18 and
andrew, and philip, and bartholomew, and matthew, and thomas, and
jam the son of alphaeus, and thaddaeus, and simon the canaanite,
3:19 and juda iscariot, which also betray him: and they went into
an house.

3:20 and the multitud cometh togeth again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread.

3:21 and when hi friend heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him: for they said, He is besid himself.

3:22 and the scribe which came down from jerusalem said, He hath
beelzebub, and by the princ of the devil casteth he out devils.

3:23 and he call them unto him, and said unto them in parables, how
can satan cast out satan?  3:24 and if a kingdom be divid against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.

3:25 and if a hous be divid against itself, that hous cannot
stand.

3:26 and if satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot
stand, but hath an end.

3:27 No man can enter into a strong man' house, and spoil hi goods,
except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his
house.

3:28 verili I say unto you, all sin shall be forgiven unto the sons
of men, and blasphemi wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: 3:29
but he that shall blasphem against the holi ghost hath never
forgiveness, but is in danger of etern damnation.

3:30 becaus they said, He hath an unclean spirit.

3:31 there came then hi brethren and hi mother, and, standing
without, sent unto him, call him.

3:32 and the multitud sat about him, and they said unto him, behold,
thi mother and thi brethren without seek for thee.

3:33 and he answer them, saying, who is my mother, or my brethren?
3:34 and he look round about on them which sat about him, and said,
behold my mother and my brethren!  3:35 for whosoev shall do the
wil of god, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

4:1 and he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was
gath unto him a great multitude, so that he enter into a ship,
and sat in the sea; and the whole multitud wa by the sea on the
land.

4:2 and he taught them mani thing by parables, and said unto them in
hi doctrine, 4:3 hearken; behold, there went out a sower to sow: 4:4
and it came to pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the
fowl of the air came and devour it up.

4:5 and some fell on stoni ground, where it had not much earth; and
immedi it sprang up, becaus it had no depth of earth: 4:6 but
when the sun wa up, it wa scorched; and becaus it had no root, it
with away.

4:7 and some fell among thorns, and the thorn grew up, and choke it,
and it yield no fruit.

4:8 and other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up
and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and
som an hundred.

4:9 and he said unto them, He that hath ear to hear, let him hear.

4:10 and when he wa alone, they that were about him with the twelve
ask of him the parable.

4:11 and he said unto them, unto you it is given to know the mystery
of the kingdom of god: but unto them that are without, all these
th are done in parables: 4:12 that see they may see, and not
perceive; and hear they may hear, and not understand; lest at any
tim they should be converted, and their sin should be forgiven them.

4:13 and he said unto them, know ye not thi parable? and how then
wil ye know all parables?  4:14 the sower soweth the word.

4:15 and these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but
when they have heard, satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the
word that wa sown in their hearts.

4:16 and these are they likewis which are sown on stoni ground; who,
when they have heard the word, immedi receiv it with gladness;
4:17 and have no root in themselves, and so endur but for a time:
afterward, when afflict or persecut ariseth for the word' sake,
immedi they are offended.

4:18 and these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the
word, 4:19 and the care of thi world, and the deceit of
riches, and the lust of other thing enter in, choke the word, and
it becometh unfruitful.

4:20 and these are they which are sown on good ground; such as hear
th word, and receiv it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some
sixty, and some an hundred.

4:21 and he said unto them, Is a candl brought to be put under a
bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?  4:22 for
ther is noth hid, which shall not be manifested; neither wa any
th kept secret, but that it should come abroad.

4:23 If ani man have ear to hear, let him hear.

4:24 and he said unto them, take heed what ye hear: with what measure
y mete, it shall be measur to you: and unto you that hear shall
mor be given.

4:25 for he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not,
from him shall be taken even that which he hath.

4:26 and he said, So is the kingdom of god, as if a man should cast
se into the ground; 4:27 and should sleep, and rise night and day,
and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how.

4:28 for the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade,
then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.

4:29 but when the fruit is brought forth, immedi he putteth in
th sickle, becaus the harvest is come.

4:30 and he said, whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of god? or with
what comparison shall we compar it?  4:31 It is like a grain of
mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all
th seed that be in the earth: 4:32 but when it is sown, it groweth
up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great
branches; so that the fowl of the air may lodg under the shadow of
it.

4:33 and with mani such parabl spake he the word unto them, as they
wer abl to hear it.

4:34 but without a parabl spake he not unto them: and when they were
alone, he expound all thing to hi disciples.

4:35 and the same day, when the even wa come, he saith unto them, let
u pass over unto the other side.

4:36 and when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as
h wa in the ship. and there were also with him other littl ships.

4:37 and there aros a great storm of wind, and the wave beat into
th ship, so that it wa now full.

4:38 and he wa in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow:
and they awak him, and say unto him, master, carest thou not that we
perish?  4:39 and he arose, and rebuk the wind, and said unto the
sea, peace, be still. and the wind ceased, and there wa a great calm.

4:40 and he said unto them, whi are ye so fearful? how is it that ye
hav no faith?  4:41 and they fear exceedingly, and said one to
another, what manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea
obey him?  5:1 and they came over unto the other side of the sea, into
th countri of the gadarenes.

5:2 and when he wa come out of the ship, immedi there met him
out of the tomb a man with an unclean spirit, 5:3 who had his
dwel among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with
chains: 5:4 becaus that he had been often bound with fetter and
chains, and the chain had been pluck asund by him, and the
fett broken in pieces: neither could ani man tame him.

5:5 and always, night and day, he wa in the mountains, and in the
tombs, crying, and cut himself with stones.

5:6 but when he saw jesu afar off, he ran and worship him, 5:7 and
cri with a loud voice, and said, what have I to do with thee, jesus,
th son of the most high god? I adjur thee by god, that thou torment
m not.

5:8 for he said unto him, come out of the man, thou unclean spirit.

5:9 and he ask him, what is thi name? and he answered, saying, my
nam is legion: for we are many.

5:10 and he besought him much that he would not send them away out of
th country.

5:11 now there wa there nigh unto the mountain a great herd of swine
feeding.

5:12 and all the devil besought him, saying, send us into the swine,
that we may enter into them.

5:13 and forthwith jesu gave them leave. and the unclean spirit went
out, and enter into the swine: and the herd ran violent down a
steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were
chok in the sea.

5:14 and they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city, and in
th country. and they went out to see what it wa that wa done.

5:15 and they come to jesus, and see him that wa possess with the
devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in hi right
mind: and they were afraid.

5:16 and they that saw it told them how it befel to him that was
possess with the devil, and also concern the swine.

5:17 and they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts.

5:18 and when he wa come into the ship, he that had been possessed
with the devil pray him that he might be with him.

5:19 howbeit jesu suffer him not, but saith unto him, Go home to
thi friends, and tell them how great thing the lord hath done for
thee, and hath had compass on thee.

5:20 and he departed, and began to publish in decapoli how great
th jesu had done for him: and all men did marvel.

5:21 and when jesu wa pass over again by ship unto the other side,
much peopl gather unto him: and he wa nigh unto the sea.

5:22 and, behold, there cometh one of the ruler of the synagogue,
jairu by name; and when he saw him, he fell at hi feet, 5:23 and
besought him greatly, saying, My littl daughter lieth at the point of
death: I pray thee, come and lay thi hand on her, that she may be
healed; and she shall live.

5:24 and jesu went with him; and much peopl follow him, and
throng him.

5:25 and a certain woman, which had an issu of blood twelv years,
5:26 and had suffer mani thing of mani physicians, and had spent
al that she had, and wa noth bettered, but rather grew worse,
5:27 when she had heard of jesus, came in the press behind, and
touch hi garment.

5:28 for she said, If I may touch but hi clothes, I shall be whole.

5:29 and straightway the fountain of her blood wa dri up; and she
felt in her bodi that she wa heal of that plague.

5:30 and jesus, immedi know in himself that virtu had gone
out of him, turn him about in the press, and said, who touch my
clothes?  5:31 and hi discipl said unto him, thou seest the
multitud throng thee, and sayest thou, who touch me?  5:32 and
h look round about to see her that had done thi thing.

5:33 but the woman fear and trembling, know what wa done in
her, came and fell down befor him, and told him all the truth.

5:34 and he said unto her, daughter, thi faith hath made thee whole;
go in peace, and be whole of thi plague.

5:35 while he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's
hous certain which said, thi daughter is dead: whi troublest thou the
mast ani further?  5:36 As soon as jesu heard the word that was
spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only
believe.

5:37 and he suffer no man to follow him, save peter, and james, and
john the brother of james.

5:38 and he cometh to the hous of the ruler of the synagogue, and
seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wail greatly.

5:39 and when he wa come in, he saith unto them, whi make ye this
ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.

5:40 and they laugh him to scorn. but when he had put them all out,
h taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were
with him, and entereth in where the damsel wa lying.

5:41 and he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, talitha
cumi; which is, be interpreted, damsel, I say unto thee, arise.

5:42 and straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she wa of the
ag of twelv years. and they were astonish with a great
astonishment.

5:43 and he charg them straitli that no man should know it; and
command that someth should be given her to eat.

6:1 and he went out from thence, and came into hi own country; and
hi discipl follow him.

6:2 and when the sabbath day wa come, he began to teach in the
synagogue: and mani hear him were astonished, saying, from whence
hath thi man these things? and what wisdom is thi which is given
unto him, that even such mighti work are wrought by hi hands?  6:3
i not thi the carpenter, the son of mary, the brother of james, and
joses, and of juda, and simon? and are not hi sister here with us?
and they were offend at him.

6:4 but jesus, said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, but in
hi own country, and among hi own kin, and in hi own house.

6:5 and he could there do no mighti work, save that he laid hi hands
upon a few sick folk, and heal them.

6:6 and he marvel becaus of their unbelief. and he went round
about the villages, teaching.

6:7 and he call unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by
two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits; 6:8 and
command them that they should take noth for their journey, save a
staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse: 6:9 but be
shod with sandals; and not put on two coats.

6:10 and he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an
house, there abid till ye depart from that place.

6:11 and whosoev shall not receiv you, nor hear you, when ye depart
thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimoni against
them.

verili I say unto you, It shall be more toler for sodom and
gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

6:12 and they went out, and preach that men should repent.

6:13 and they cast out mani devils, and anoint with oil mani that
wer sick, and heal them.

6:14 and king herod heard of him; (for hi name wa spread abroad:)
and he said, that john the baptist wa risen from the dead, and
therefor mighti work do shew forth themselv in him.

6:15 other said, that it is elias. and other said, that it is a
prophet, or as one of the prophets.

6:16 but when herod heard thereof, he said, It is john, whom i
beheaded: he is risen from the dead.

6:17 for herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon john, and
bound him in prison for herodias' sake, hi brother philip' wife: for
h had marri her.

6:18 for john had said unto herod, It is not law for thee to have
thi brother' wife.

6:19 therefor herodia had a quarrel against him, and would have
kil him; but she could not: 6:20 for herod fear john, knowing
that he wa a just man and an holy, and observ him; and when he
heard him, he did mani things, and heard him gladly.

6:21 and when a conveni day wa come, that herod on hi birthday
mad a supper to hi lords, high captains, and chief estat of
galilee; 6:22 and when the daughter of the said herodia came in, and
danced, and pleas herod and them that sat with him, the king said
unto the damsel, ask of me whatsoev thou wilt, and I will give it
thee.

6:23 and he sware unto her, whatsoev thou shalt ask of me, I will
giv it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.

6:24 and she went forth, and said unto her mother, what shall I ask?
and she said, the head of john the baptist.

6:25 and she came in straightway with hast unto the king, and asked,
saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of
john the baptist.

6:26 and the king wa exceed sorry; yet for hi oath' sake, and
for their sake which sat with him, he would not reject her.

6:27 and immedi the king sent an executioner, and command his
head to be brought: and he went and behead him in the prison, 6:28
and brought hi head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the
damsel gave it to her mother.

6:29 and when hi discipl heard of it, they came and took up his
corpse, and laid it in a tomb.

6:30 and the apostl gather themselv togeth unto jesus, and
told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had
taught.

6:31 and he said unto them, come ye yourselv apart into a desert
place, and rest a while: for there were mani come and going, and
they had no leisur so much as to eat.

6:32 and they depart into a desert place by ship privately.

6:33 and the peopl saw them departing, and mani knew him, and ran
afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together
unto him.

6:34 and jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and wa move with
compass toward them, becaus they were as sheep not have a
shepherd: and he began to teach them mani things.

6:35 and when the day wa now far spent, hi discipl came unto him,
and said, thi is a desert place, and now the time is far passed: 6:36
send them away, that they may go into the countri round about, and
into the villages, and buy themselv bread: for they have noth to
eat.

6:37 He answer and said unto them, give ye them to eat. and they say
unto him, shall we go and buy two hundr pennyworth of bread, and
giv them to eat?  6:38 He saith unto them, how mani loav have ye?
go and see. and when they knew, they say, five, and two fishes.

6:39 and he command them to make all sit down by compani upon the
green grass.

6:40 and they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.

6:41 and when he had taken the five loav and the two fishes, he
look up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them
to hi discipl to set befor them; and the two fish divid he
among them all.

6:42 and they did all eat, and were filled.

6:43 and they took up twelv basket full of the fragments, and of the
fishes.

6:44 and they that did eat of the loav were about five thousand men.

6:45 and straightway he constrain hi discipl to get into the
ship, and to go to the other side befor unto bethsaida, while he sent
away the people.

6:46 and when he had sent them away, he depart into a mountain to
pray.

6:47 and when even wa come, the ship wa in the midst of the sea, and
h alon on the land.

6:48 and he saw them toil in rowing; for the wind wa contrari unto
them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them,
walk upon the sea, and would have pass by them.

6:49 but when they saw him walk upon the sea, they suppos it had
been a spirit, and cri out: 6:50 for they all saw him, and were
troubled. and immedi he talk with them, and saith unto them, be
of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid.

6:51 and he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased: and
they were sore amaz in themselv beyond measure, and wondered.

6:52 for they consid not the miracl of the loaves: for their
heart wa hardened.

6:53 and when they had pass over, they came into the land of
gennesaret, and drew to the shore.

6:54 and when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew
him, 6:55 and ran through that whole region round about, and began to
carri about in bed those that were sick, where they heard he was.

6:56 and whithersoev he entered, into villages, or cities, or
country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they
might touch if it were but the border of hi garment: and as mani as
touch him were made whole.

7:1 then came togeth unto him the pharisees, and certain of the
scribes, which came from jerusalem.

7:2 and when they saw some of hi discipl eat bread with defiled,
that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found fault.

7:3 for the pharisees, and all the jews, except they wash their hands
oft, eat not, hold the tradit of the elders.

7:4 and when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat
not.

and mani other thing there be, which they have receiv to hold, as
th wash of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables.

7:5 then the pharise and scribe ask him, whi walk not thy
discipl accord to the tradit of the elders, but eat bread with
unwashen hands?  7:6 He answer and said unto them, well hath esaias
prophesi of you hypocrites, as it is written, thi peopl honoureth
m with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

7:7 howbeit in vain do they worship me, teach for doctrin the
command of men.

7:8 for lay asid the command of god, ye hold the tradit of
men, as the wash of pot and cups: and mani other such like things
y do.

7:9 and he said unto them, full well ye reject the command of god,
that ye may keep your own tradition.

7:10 for mose said, honour thi father and thi mother; and, whoso
curseth father or mother, let him die the death: 7:11 but ye say, If a
man shall say to hi father or mother, It is corban, that is to say, a
gift, by whatsoev thou mightest be profit by me; he shall be free.

7:12 and ye suffer him no more to do ought for hi father or his
mother; 7:13 make the word of god of none effect through your
tradition, which ye have delivered: and mani such like thing do ye.

7:14 and when he had call all the peopl unto him, he said unto
them, hearken unto me everi one of you, and understand: 7:15 there is
noth from without a man, that enter into him can defil him: but
th thing which come out of him, those are they that defil the man.

7:16 If ani man have ear to hear, let him hear.

7:17 and when he wa enter into the hous from the people, his
discipl ask him concern the parable.

7:18 and he saith unto them, are ye so without understand also? do
y not perceive, that whatsoev thing from without entereth into the
man, it cannot defil him; 7:19 becaus it entereth not into his
heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purg all
meats?  7:20 and he said, that which cometh out of the man, that
defileth the man.

7:21 for from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, 7:22 thefts, covetousness,
wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride,
foolishness: 7:23 all these evil thing come from within, and defile
th man.

7:24 and from thenc he arose, and went into the border of tyre and
sidon, and enter into an house, and would have no man know it: but
h could not be hid.

7:25 for a certain woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit,
heard of him, and came and fell at hi feet: 7:26 the woman wa a
greek, a syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would
cast forth the devil out of her daughter.

7:27 but jesu said unto her, let the children first be filled: for it
i not meet to take the children' bread, and to cast it unto the
dogs.

7:28 and she answer and said unto him, yes, lord: yet the dog under
th tabl eat of the children' crumbs.

7:29 and he said unto her, for thi say go thi way; the devil is
gon out of thi daughter.

7:30 and when she wa come to her house, she found the devil gone out,
and her daughter laid upon the bed.

7:31 and again, depart from the coast of tyre and sidon, he came
unto the sea of galilee, through the midst of the coast of decapolis.

7:32 and they bring unto him one that wa deaf, and had an impediment
in hi speech; and they beseech him to put hi hand upon him.

7:33 and he took him asid from the multitude, and put hi fingers
into hi ears, and he spit, and touch hi tongue; 7:34 and looking
up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, ephphatha, that is, be
opened.

7:35 and straightway hi ear were opened, and the string of his
tongu wa loosed, and he spake plain.

7:36 and he charg them that they should tell no man: but the more he
charg them, so much the more a great deal they publish it; 7:37
and were beyond measur astonished, saying, He hath done all things
well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

8:1 In those day the multitud be veri great, and have nothing
to eat, jesu call hi discipl unto him, and saith unto them, 8:2
i have compass on the multitude, becaus they have now been with me
thre days, and have noth to eat: 8:3 and if I send them away
fast to their own houses, they will faint by the way: for diver of
them came from far.

8:4 and hi discipl answer him, from whenc can a man satisfy
thes men with bread here in the wilderness?  8:5 and he ask them,
how mani loav have ye? and they said, seven.

8:6 and he command the peopl to sit down on the ground: and he took
th seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his
discipl to set befor them; and they did set them befor the people.

8:7 and they had a few small fishes: and he blessed, and command to
set them also befor them.

8:8 So they did eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken
meat that wa left seven baskets.

8:9 and they that had eaten were about four thousand: and he sent them
away.

8:10 and straightway he enter into a ship with hi disciples, and
cam into the part of dalmanutha.

8:11 and the pharise came forth, and began to question with him,
seek of him a sign from heaven, tempt him.

8:12 and he sigh deepli in hi spirit, and saith, whi doth this
gener seek after a sign? verili I say unto you, there shall no
sign be given unto thi generation.

8:13 and he left them, and enter into the ship again depart to
th other side.

8:14 now the discipl had forgotten to take bread, neither had they
in the ship with them more than one loaf.

8:15 and he charg them, saying, take heed, bewar of the leaven of
th pharisees, and of the leaven of herod.

8:16 and they reason among themselves, saying, It is becaus we have
no bread.

8:17 and when jesu knew it, he saith unto them, whi reason ye,
becaus ye have no bread? perceiv ye not yet, neither understand?
hav ye your heart yet hardened?  8:18 have eyes, see ye not? and
hav ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember?  8:19 when I brake
th five loav among five thousand, how mani basket full of
frag took ye up? they say unto him, twelve.

8:20 and when the seven among four thousand, how mani basket full of
frag took ye up? and they said, seven.

8:21 and he said unto them, how is it that ye do not understand?  8:22
and he cometh to bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and
besought him to touch him.

8:23 and he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the
town; and when he had spit on hi eyes, and put hi hand upon him, he
ask him if he saw ought.

8:24 and he look up, and said, I see men as trees, walking.

8:25 after that he put hi hand again upon hi eyes, and made him
look up: and he wa restored, and saw everi man clearly.

8:26 and he sent him away to hi house, saying, neither go into the
town, nor tell it to ani in the town.

8:27 and jesu went out, and hi disciples, into the town of caesarea
philippi: and by the way he ask hi disciples, say unto them,
whom do men say that I am?  8:28 and they answered, john the baptist;
but some say, elias; and others, one of the prophets.

8:29 and he saith unto them, but whom say ye that I am? and peter
answereth and saith unto him, thou art the christ.

8:30 and he charg them that they should tell no man of him.

8:31 and he began to teach them, that the son of man must suffer many
things, and be reject of the elders, and of the chief priests, and
scribes, and be killed, and after three day rise again.

8:32 and he spake that say openly. and peter took him, and began to
rebuk him.

8:33 but when he had turn about and look on hi disciples, he
rebuk peter, saying, get thee behind me, satan: for thou savourest
not the thing that be of god, but the thing that be of men.

8:34 and when he had call the peopl unto him with hi disciples
also, he said unto them, whosoev will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up hi cross, and follow me.

8:35 for whosoev will save hi life shall lose it; but whosoever
shal lose hi life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save
it.

8:36 for what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose hi own soul?  8:37 Or what shall a man give in exchang for
hi soul?  8:38 whosoev therefor shall be asham of me and of my
word in thi adulter and sin generation; of him also shall the
son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glori of hi father with
th holi angels.

9:1 and he said unto them, verili I say unto you, that there be some
of them that stand here, which shall not tast of death, till they
hav seen the kingdom of god come with power.

9:2 and after six day jesu taketh with him peter, and james, and
john, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves:
and he wa transfigur befor them.

9:3 and hi raiment becam shining, exceed white as snow; so as no
ful on earth can white them.

9:4 and there appear unto them elia with moses: and they were
talk with jesus.

9:5 and peter answer and said to jesus, master, it is good for us to
b here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
moses, and one for elias.

9:6 for he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid.

9:7 and there wa a cloud that overshadow them: and a voic came out
of the cloud, saying, thi is my belov son: hear him.

9:8 and suddenly, when they had look round about, they saw no man
ani more, save jesu onli with themselves.

9:9 and as they came down from the mountain, he charg them that they
should tell no man what thing they had seen, till the son of man were
risen from the dead.

9:10 and they kept that say with themselves, question one with
anoth what the rise from the dead should mean.

9:11 and they ask him, saying, whi say the scribe that elia must
first come?  9:12 and he answer and told them, elia verili cometh
first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the son of
man, that he must suffer mani things, and be set at nought.

9:13 but I say unto you, that elia is inde come, and they have done
unto him whatsoev they listed, as it is written of him.

9:14 and when he came to hi disciples, he saw a great multitud about
them, and the scribe question with them.

9:15 and straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were
greatli amazed, and run to him salut him.

9:16 and he ask the scribes, what question ye with them?  9:17 and
on of the multitud answer and said, master, I have brought unto
the my son, which hath a dumb spirit; 9:18 and wheresoev he taketh
him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with hi teeth, and
pineth away: and I spake to thi discipl that they should cast him
out; and they could not.

9:19 He answereth him, and saith, O faithless generation, how long
shal I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me.

9:20 and they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway
th spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallow foaming.

9:21 and he ask hi father, how long is it ago sinc thi came unto
him?  and he said, Of a child.

9:22 and ofttim it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters,
to destroy him: but if thou canst do ani thing, have compass on us,
and help us.

9:23 jesu said unto him, If thou canst believe, all thing are
poss to him that believeth.

9:24 and straightway the father of the child cri out, and said with
tears, lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.

9:25 when jesu saw that the peopl came run together, he rebuked
th foul spirit, say unto him, thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge
thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.

9:26 and the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and
h wa as one dead; insomuch that mani said, He is dead.

9:27 but jesu took him by the hand, and lift him up; and he arose.

9:28 and when he wa come into the house, hi discipl ask him
privately, whi could not we cast him out?  9:29 and he said unto them,
thi kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

9:30 and they depart thence, and pass through galilee; and he
would not that ani man should know it.

9:31 for he taught hi disciples, and said unto them, the son of man
i deliv into the hand of men, and they shall kill him; and after
that he is killed, he shall rise the third day.

9:32 but they understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.

9:33 and he came to capernaum: and be in the hous he ask them,
what wa it that ye disput among yourselv by the way?  9:34 but
they held their peace: for by the way they had disput among
themselves, who should be the greatest.

9:35 and he sat down, and call the twelve, and saith unto them, if
ani man desir to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant
of all.

9:36 and he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when
h had taken him in hi arms, he said unto them, 9:37 whosoev shall
rec one of such children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever
shal receiv me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me.

9:38 and john answer him, saying, master, we saw one cast out
devil in thi name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him,
becaus he followeth not us.

9:39 but jesu said, forbid him not: for there is no man which shall
do a miracl in my name, that can lightli speak evil of me.

9:40 for he that is not against us is on our part.

9:41 for whosoev shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name,
becaus ye belong to christ, verili I say unto you, he shall not lose
hi reward.

9:42 and whosoev shall offend one of these littl one that believe
in me, it is better for him that a millston were hang about his
neck, and he were cast into the sea.

9:43 and if thi hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
ent into life maimed, than have two hand to go into hell, into
th fire that never shall be quenched: 9:44 where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched.

9:45 and if thi foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
ent halt into life, than have two feet to be cast into hell, into
th fire that never shall be quenched: 9:46 where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched.

9:47 and if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee
to enter into the kingdom of god with one eye, than have two eye to
b cast into hell fire: 9:48 where their worm dieth not, and the fire
i not quenched.

9:49 for everi one shall be salt with fire, and everi sacrifice
shal be salt with salt.

9:50 salt is good: but if the salt have lost hi saltness, wherewith
wil ye season it? have salt in yourselves, and have peac one with
another.

10:1 and he aros from thence, and cometh into the coast of judaea by
th farther side of jordan: and the peopl resort unto him again; and,
a he wa wont, he taught them again.

10:2 and the pharise came to him, and ask him, Is it law for a
man to put away hi wife? tempt him.

10:3 and he answer and said unto them, what did mose command you?
10:4 and they said, mose suffer to write a bill of divorcement, and
to put her away.

10:5 and jesu answer and said unto them, for the hard of your
heart he wrote you thi precept.

10:6 but from the begin of the creation god made them male and
female.

10:7 for thi caus shall a man leav hi father and mother, and
cleav to hi wife; 10:8 and they twain shall be one flesh: so then
they are no more twain, but one flesh.

10:9 what therefor god hath join together, let not man put asunder.

10:10 and in the hous hi discipl ask him again of the same
matter.

10:11 and he saith unto them, whosoev shall put away hi wife, and
marri another, committeth adulteri against her.

10:12 and if a woman shall put away her husband, and be marri to
another, she committeth adultery.

10:13 and they brought young children to him, that he should touch
them: and hi discipl rebuk those that brought them.

10:14 but when jesu saw it, he wa much displeased, and said unto
them, suffer the littl children to come unto me, and forbid them not:
for of such is the kingdom of god.

10:15 verili I say unto you, whosoev shall not receiv the kingdom
of god as a littl child, he shall not enter therein.

10:16 and he took them up in hi arms, put hi hand upon them, and
bless them.

10:17 and when he wa gone forth into the way, there came one running,
and kneel to him, and ask him, good master, what shall I do that i
may inherit etern life?  10:18 and jesu said unto him, whi callest
th me good? there is none good but one, that is, god.

10:19 thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not
kill, Do not steal, Do not bear fals witness, defraud not, honour thy
fath and mother.  10:20 and he answer and said unto him, master,
al these have I observ from my youth.

10:21 then jesu behold him love him, and said unto him, one thing
thou lackest: go thi way, sell whatsoev thou hast, and give to the
poor, and thou shalt have treasur in heaven: and come, take up the
cross, and follow me.

10:22 and he wa sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had
great possessions.

10:23 and jesu look round about, and saith unto hi disciples, how
hardli shall they that have rich enter into the kingdom of god!
10:24 and the discipl were astonish at hi words. but jesus
answereth again, and saith unto them, children, how hard is it for
them that trust in rich to enter into the kingdom of god!  10:25 it
i easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.

10:26 and they were astonish out of measure, say among
themselves, who then can be saved?  10:27 and jesu look upon them
saith, with men it is impossible, but not with god: for with god all
th are possible.

10:28 then peter began to say unto him, lo, we have left all, and have
follow thee.

10:29 and jesu answer and said, verili I say unto you, there is no
man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's,
10:30 but he shall receiv an hundredfold now in thi time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions; and in the world to come etern life.

10:31 but mani that are first shall be last; and the last first.

10:32 and they were in the way go up to jerusalem; and jesu went
befor them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were
afraid.

and he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things
should happen unto him, 10:33 saying, behold, we go up to jerusalem;
and the son of man shall be deliv unto the chief priests, and unto
th scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver
him to the gentiles: 10:34 and they shall mock him, and shall scourge
him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him: and the third day he
shal rise again.

10:35 and jame and john, the son of zebedee, come unto him, saying,
master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoev we shall
desire.

10:36 and he said unto them, what would ye that I should do for you?
10:37 they said unto him, grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy
right hand, and the other on thi left hand, in thi glory.

10:38 but jesu said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink
of the cup that I drink of? and be baptiz with the baptism that I am
bapt with?  10:39 and they said unto him, We can. and jesu said
unto them, Ye shall inde drink of the cup that I drink of; and with
th baptism that I am baptiz withal shall ye be baptized: 10:40 but
to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but
it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared.

10:41 and when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeas with
jam and john.

10:42 but jesu call them to him, and saith unto them, Ye know that
they which are account to rule over the gentil exercis lordship
ov them; and their great one exercis author upon them.

10:43 but so shall it not be among you: but whosoev will be great
among you, shall be your minister: 10:44 and whosoev of you will be
th chiefest, shall be servant of all.

10:45 for even the son of man came not to be minist unto, but to
minister, and to give hi life a ransom for many.

10:46 and they came to jericho: and as he went out of jericho with his
discipl and a great number of people, blind bartimaeus, the son of
timaeus, sat by the highway side begging.

10:47 and when he heard that it wa jesu of nazareth, he began to cry
out, and say, jesus, thou son of david, have merci on me.

10:48 and mani charg him that he should hold hi peace: but he cried
th more a great deal, thou son of david, have merci on me.

10:49 and jesu stood still, and command him to be called. and they
cal the blind man, say unto him, Be of good comfort, rise; he
calleth thee.

10:50 and he, cast away hi garment, rose, and came to jesus.

10:51 and jesu answer and said unto him, what wilt thou that i
should do unto thee? the blind man said unto him, lord, that I might
rec my sight.

10:52 and jesu said unto him, Go thi way; thi faith hath made thee
whole.

and immedi he receiv hi sight, and follow jesu in the way.

11:1 and when they came nigh to jerusalem, unto bethphag and bethany,
at the mount of olives, he sendeth forth two of hi disciples, 11:2
and saith unto them, Go your way into the villag over against you:
and as soon as ye be enter into it, ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon never man sat; loos him, and bring him.

11:3 and if ani man say unto you, whi do ye this? say ye that the lord
hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither.

11:4 and they went their way, and found the colt tie by the door
without in a place where two way met; and they loos him.

11:5 and certain of them that stood there said unto them, what do ye,
loos the colt?  11:6 and they said unto them even as jesu had
commanded: and they let them go.

11:7 and they brought the colt to jesus, and cast their garment on
him; and he sat upon him.

11:8 and mani spread their garment in the way: and other cut down
branch off the trees, and straw them in the way.

11:9 and they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying,
hosanna; bless is he that cometh in the name of the lord: 11:10
bless be the kingdom of our father david, that cometh in the name of
th lord: hosanna in the highest.

11:11 and jesu enter into jerusalem, and into the temple: and when
h had look round about upon all things, and now the eventid was
come, he went out unto bethani with the twelve.

11:12 and on the morrow, when they were come from bethany, he was
hungry: 11:13 and see a fig tree afar off have leaves, he came,
if hapli he might find ani thing thereon: and when he came to it, he
found noth but leaves; for the time of fig wa not yet.

11:14 and jesu answer and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee
hereaft for ever. and hi discipl heard it.

11:15 and they come to jerusalem: and jesu went into the temple, and
began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and
overthrew the tabl of the moneychangers, and the seat of them that
sold doves; 11:16 and would not suffer that ani man should carri any
vessel through the temple.

11:17 and he taught, say unto them, Is it not written, My house
shal be call of all nation the hous of prayer? but ye have made
it a den of thieves.

11:18 and the scribe and chief priest heard it, and sought how they
might destroy him: for they fear him, becaus all the peopl was
astonish at hi doctrine.

11:19 and when even wa come, he went out of the city.

11:20 and in the morning, as they pass by, they saw the fig tree
dri up from the roots.

11:21 and peter call to remembr saith unto him, master, behold,
th fig tree which thou cursedst is wither away.

11:22 and jesu answer saith unto them, have faith in god.

11:23 for verili I say unto you, that whosoev shall say unto this
mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall
not doubt in hi heart, but shall believ that those thing which he
saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoev he saith.

11:24 therefor I say unto you, what thing soever ye desire, when ye
pray, believ that ye receiv them, and ye shall have them.

11:25 and when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against
any: that your father also which is in heaven may forgiv you your
trespasses.

11:26 but if ye do not forgive, neither will your father which is in
heaven forgiv your trespasses.

11:27 and they come again to jerusalem: and as he wa walk in the
temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the
elders, 11:28 and say unto him, By what author doest thou these
things? and who gave thee thi author to do these things?  11:29
and jesu answer and said unto them, I will also ask of you one
question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what author I do
thes things.

11:30 the baptism of john, wa it from heaven, or of men? answer me.

11:31 and they reason with themselves, saying, If we shall say, from
heaven; he will say, whi then did ye not believ him?  11:32 but if we
shal say, Of men; they fear the people: for all men count john,
that he wa a prophet indeed.

11:33 and they answer and said unto jesus, We cannot tell. and jesus
answ saith unto them, neither do I tell you by what author i
do these things.

12:1 and he began to speak unto them by parables. A certain man
plant a vineyard, and set an hedg about it, and dig a place for
th winefat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went
into a far country.

12:2 and at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he
might receiv from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard.

12:3 and they caught him, and beat him, and sent him away empty.

12:4 and again he sent unto them anoth servant; and at him they cast
stones, and wound him in the head, and sent him away shamefully
handled.

12:5 and again he sent another; and him they killed, and mani others;
b some, and kill some.

12:6 have yet therefor one son, hi wellbeloved, he sent him also
last unto them, saying, they will rever my son.

12:7 but those husbandmen said among themselves, thi is the heir;
come, let us kill him, and the inherit shall be our's.

12:8 and they took him, and kill him, and cast him out of the
vineyard.

12:9 what shall therefor the lord of the vineyard do? he will come
and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others.

12:10 and have ye not read thi scripture; the stone which the
build reject is becom the head of the corner: 12:11 thi wa the
lord' doing, and it is marvel in our eyes?  12:12 and they sought
to lay hold on him, but fear the people: for they knew that he had
spoken the parabl against them: and they left him, and went their
way.

12:13 and they send unto him certain of the pharise and of the
herodians, to catch him in hi words.

12:14 and when they were come, they say unto him, master, we know that
thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the
person of men, but teachest the way of god in truth: Is it law to
giv tribut to caesar, or not?  12:15 shall we give, or shall we not
give? but he, know their hypocrisy, said unto them, whi tempt ye
me? bring me a penny, that I may see it.

12:16 and they brought it. and he saith unto them, whose is thi image
and superscription? and they said unto him, caesar's.

12:17 and jesu answer said unto them, render to caesar the things
that are caesar's, and to god the thing that are god's. and they
marvel at him.

12:18 then come unto him the sadducees, which say there is no
resurrection; and they ask him, saying, 12:19 master, mose wrote
unto us, If a man' brother die, and leav hi wife behind him, and
leav no children, that hi brother should take hi wife, and rais up
se unto hi brother.

12:20 now there were seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and
di left no seed.

12:21 and the second took her, and died, neither left he ani seed: and
th third likewise.

12:22 and the seven had her, and left no seed: last of all the woman
di also.

12:23 In the resurrect therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife
shal she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.

12:24 and jesu answer said unto them, Do ye not therefor err,
becaus ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of god?  12:25
for when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage; but are as the angel which are in heaven.

12:26 and as touch the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in
th book of moses, how in the bush god spake unto him, saying, I am
th god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and the god of jacob?  12:27
he is not the god of the dead, but the god of the living: ye therefore
do greatli err.

12:28 and one of the scribe came, and have heard them reasoning
together, and perceiv that he had answer them well, ask him,
which is the first command of all?  12:29 and jesu answer him,
th first of all the command is, hear, O israel; the lord our god
i one lord: 12:30 and thou shalt love the lord thi god with all thy
heart, and with all thi soul, and with all thi mind, and with all thy
strength: thi is the first commandment.

12:31 and the second is like, name this, thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. there is none other command greater than
these.

12:32 and the scribe said unto him, well, master, thou hast said the
truth: for there is one god; and there is none other but he: 12:33 and
to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and
with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his
neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offer and
sacrifices.

12:34 and when jesu saw that he answer discreetly, he said unto
him, thou art not far from the kingdom of god. and no man after that
durst ask him ani question.

12:35 and jesu answer and said, while he taught in the temple, how
say the scribe that christ is the son of david?  12:36 for david
himself said by the holi ghost, the lord said to my lord, sit thou on
mi right hand, till I make thine enemi thi footstool.

12:37 david therefor himself calleth him lord; and whenc is he then
hi son? and the common peopl heard him gladly.

12:38 and he said unto them in hi doctrine, bewar of the scribes,
which love to go in long clothing, and love salut in the
marketplaces, 12:39 and the chief seat in the synagogues, and the
uppermost room at feasts: 12:40 which devour widows' houses, and for
a pretenc make long prayers: these shall receiv greater damnation.

12:41 and jesu sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the
peopl cast money into the treasury: and mani that were rich cast in
much.

12:42 and there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites,
which make a farthing.

12:43 and he call unto him hi disciples, and saith unto them,
verili I say unto you, that thi poor widow hath cast more in, than
al they which have cast into the treasury: 12:44 for all they did
cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that
sh had, even all her living.

13:1 and as he went out of the temple, one of hi discipl saith unto
him, master, see what manner of stone and what build are here!
13:2 and jesu answer said unto him, seest thou these great
buildings?  there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall
not be thrown down.

13:3 and as he sat upon the mount of oliv over against the temple,
pet and jame and john and andrew ask him privately, 13:4 tell us,
when shall these thing be? and what shall be the sign when all these
th shall be fulfilled?  13:5 and jesu answer them began to
say, take heed lest ani man deceiv you: 13:6 for mani shall come in
mi name, saying, I am christ; and shall deceiv many.

13:7 and when ye shall hear of war and rumour of wars, be ye not
troubled: for such thing must need be; but the end shall not be yet.

13:8 for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: and there shall be earthquak in diver places, and there
shal be famin and troubles: these are the begin of sorrows.

13:9 but take heed to yourselves: for they shall deliv you up to
councils; and in the synagogu ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be
brought befor ruler and king for my sake, for a testimoni against
them.

13:10 and the gospel must first be publish among all nations.

13:11 but when they shall lead you, and deliv you up, take no
thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but
whatsoev shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is
not ye that speak, but the holi ghost.

13:12 now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the
fath the son; and children shall rise up against their parents, and
shal caus them to be put to death.

13:13 and ye shall be hate of all men for my name' sake: but he that
shal endur unto the end, the same shall be saved.

13:14 but when ye shall see the abomin of desolation, spoken of
bi daniel the prophet, stand where it ought not, (let him that
readeth understand,) then let them that be in judaea flee to the
mountains: 13:15 and let him that is on the housetop not go down into
th house, neither enter therein, to take ani thing out of hi house:
13:16 and let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take
up hi garment.

13:17 but woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck
in those days!  13:18 and pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter.

13:19 for in those day shall be affliction, such as wa not from the
begin of the creation which god creat unto thi time, neither
shal be.

13:20 and except that the lord had shorten those days, no flesh
should be saved: but for the elect' sake, whom he hath chosen, he
hath shorten the days.

13:21 and then if ani man shall say to you, lo, here is christ; or,
lo, he is there; believ him not: 13:22 for fals christ and false
prophet shall rise, and shall shew sign and wonders, to seduce, if
it were possible, even the elect.

13:23 but take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.

13:24 but in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, 13:25 and the stars
of heaven shall fall, and the power that are in heaven shall be
shaken.

13:26 and then shall they see the son of man come in the cloud with
great power and glory.

13:27 and then shall he send hi angels, and shall gather togeth his
elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the
uttermost part of heaven.

13:28 now learn a parabl of the fig tree; when her branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near: 13:29
so ye in like manner, when ye shall see these thing come to pass,
know that it is nigh, even at the doors.

13:30 verili I say unto you, that thi gener shall not pass, till
al these thing be done.

13:31 heaven and earth shall pass away: but my word shall not pass
away.

13:32 but of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
which are in heaven, neither the son, but the father.

13:33 take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.

13:34 for the son of man is as a man take a far journey, who left
hi house, and gave author to hi servants, and to everi man his
work, and command the porter to watch.

13:35 watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house
cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the
morning: 13:36 lest come suddenli he find you sleeping.

13:37 and what I say unto you I say unto all, watch.

14:1 after two day wa the feast of the passover, and of unleavened
bread: and the chief priest and the scribe sought how they might
tak him by craft, and put him to death.

14:2 but they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar of
th people.

14:3 and be in bethani in the hous of simon the leper, as he sat
at meat, there came a woman have an alabast box of ointment of
spikenard veri precious; and she brake the box, and pour it on his
head.

14:4 and there were some that had indign within themselves, and
said, whi wa thi wast of the ointment made?  14:5 for it might have
been sold for more than three hundr pence, and have been given to
th poor. and they murmur against her.

14:6 and jesu said, let her alone; whi troubl ye her? she hath
wrought a good work on me.

14:7 for ye have the poor with you always, and whensoev ye will ye
may do them good: but me ye have not always.

14:8 she hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my
bodi to the burying.

14:9 verili I say unto you, wheresoev thi gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, thi also that she hath done shall be
spoken of for a memori of her.

14:10 and juda iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief
priests, to betray him unto them.

14:11 and when they heard it, they were glad, and promis to give him
money. and he sought how he might conveni betray him.

14:12 and the first day of unleaven bread, when they kill the
passover, hi discipl said unto him, where wilt thou that we go and
prepar that thou mayest eat the passover?  14:13 and he sendeth forth
two of hi disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and
ther shall meet you a man bear a pitcher of water: follow him.

14:14 and wheresoev he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the
house, the master saith, where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat
th passov with my disciples?  14:15 and he will shew you a large
upp room furnish and prepared: there make readi for us.

14:16 and hi discipl went forth, and came into the city, and found
a he had said unto them: and they made readi the passover.

14:17 and in the even he cometh with the twelve.

14:18 and as they sat and did eat, jesu said, verili I say unto you,
on of you which eateth with me shall betray me.

14:19 and they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one,
i it I? and anoth said, Is it I?  14:20 and he answer and said
unto them, It is one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish.

14:21 the son of man inde goeth, as it is written of him: but woe to
that man by whom the son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man
if he had never been born.

14:22 and as they did eat, jesu took bread, and blessed, and brake
it, and gave to them, and said, take, eat: thi is my body.

14:23 and he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to
them: and they all drank of it.

14:24 and he said unto them, thi is my blood of the new testament,
which is shed for many.

14:25 verili I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the
vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of god.

14:26 and when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
olives.

14:27 and jesu saith unto them, all ye shall be offend becaus of
m thi night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered.

14:28 but after that I am risen, I will go befor you into galilee.

14:29 but peter said unto him, although all shall be offended, yet
wil not i.

14:30 and jesu saith unto him, verili I say unto thee, that thi day,
even in thi night, befor the cock crow twice, thou shalt deni me
thrice.

14:31 but he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, i
wil not deni thee in ani wise. likewis also said they all.

14:32 and they came to a place which wa name gethsemane: and he
saith to hi disciples, sit ye here, while I shall pray.

14:33 and he taketh with him peter and jame and john, and began to be
sor amazed, and to be veri heavy; 14:34 and saith unto them, My soul
i exceed sorrow unto death: tarri ye here, and watch.

14:35 and he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.

14:36 and he said, abba, father, all thing are possibl unto thee;
tak away thi cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what
thou wilt.

14:37 and he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto peter,
simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?  14:38 watch
y and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. the spirit truli is ready,
but the flesh is weak.

14:39 and again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words.

14:40 and when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their
ey were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him.

14:41 and he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, sleep on now,
and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the son of
man is betray into the hand of sinners.

14:42 rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand.

14:43 and immediately, while he yet spake, cometh judas, one of the
twelve, and with him a great multitud with sword and staves, from
th chief priest and the scribe and the elders.

14:44 and he that betray him had given them a token, saying,
whomsoev I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead him away
safely.

14:45 and as soon as he wa come, he goeth straightway to him, and
saith, master, master; and kiss him.

14:46 and they laid their hand on him, and took him.

14:47 and one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant
of the high priest, and cut off hi ear.

14:48 and jesu answer and said unto them, are ye come out, as
against a thief, with sword and with stave to take me?  14:49 I was
daili with you in the templ teaching, and ye took me not: but the
scriptur must be fulfilled.

14:50 and they all forsook him, and fled.

14:51 and there follow him a certain young man, have a linen cloth
cast about hi nake body; and the young men laid hold on him: 14:52
and he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.

14:53 and they led jesu away to the high priest: and with him were
assembl all the chief priest and the elder and the scribes.

14:54 and peter follow him afar off, even into the palac of the
high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warm himself at the
fire.

14:55 and the chief priest and all the council sought for witness
against jesu to put him to death; and found none.

14:56 for mani bare fals wit against him, but their witness
agre not together.

14:57 and there aros certain, and bare fals wit against him,
saying, 14:58 We heard him say, I will destroy thi templ that is
mad with hands, and within three day I will build anoth made
without hands.

14:59 but neither so did their wit agre together.

14:60 and the high priest stood up in the midst, and ask jesus,
saying, answerest thou nothing? what is it which these wit against
thee?  14:61 but he held hi peace, and answer nothing. again the
high priest ask him, and said unto him, art thou the christ, the son
of the blessed?  14:62 and jesu said, I am: and ye shall see the son
of man sit on the right hand of power, and come in the cloud of
heaven.

14:63 then the high priest rent hi clothes, and saith, what need we
ani further witnesses?  14:64 Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think
ye? and they all condemn him to be guilti of death.

14:65 and some began to spit on him, and to cover hi face, and to
buffet him, and to say unto him, prophesy: and the servant did strike
him with the palm of their hands.

14:66 and as peter wa beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the
maid of the high priest: 14:67 and when she saw peter warming
himself, she look upon him, and said, and thou also wast with jesus
of nazareth.

14:68 but he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what
thou sayest. and he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.

14:69 and a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood
by, thi is one of them.

14:70 and he deni it again. and a littl after, they that stood by
said again to peter, sure thou art one of them: for thou art a
galilaean, and thi speech agreeth thereto.

14:71 but he began to curs and to swear, saying, I know not thi man
of whom ye speak.

14:72 and the second time the cock crew. and peter call to mind the
word that jesu said unto him, befor the cock crow twice, thou shalt
deni me thrice. and when he thought thereon, he wept.

15:1 and straightway in the morn the chief priest held a
consult with the elder and scribe and the whole council, and
bound jesus, and carri him away, and deliv him to pilate.

15:2 and pilat ask him, art thou the king of the jews? and he
answ said unto them, thou sayest it.

15:3 and the chief priest accus him of mani things: but he answered
nothing.

15:4 and pilat ask him again, saying, answerest thou nothing?
behold how mani thing they wit against thee.

15:5 but jesu yet answer nothing; so that pilat marvelled.

15:6 now at that feast he releas unto them one prisoner, whomsoever
they desired.

15:7 and there wa one name barabbas, which lay bound with them that
had made insurrect with him, who had commit murder in the
insurrection.

15:8 and the multitud cri aloud began to desir him to do as he
had ever done unto them.

15:9 but pilat answer them, saying, will ye that I releas unto you
th king of the jews?  15:10 for he knew that the chief priest had
deliv him for envy.

15:11 but the chief priest move the people, that he should rather
releas barabba unto them.

15:12 and pilat answer and said again unto them, what will ye then
that I shall do unto him whom ye call the king of the jews?  15:13 and
they cri out again, crucifi him.

15:14 then pilat said unto them, why, what evil hath he done? and
they cri out the more exceedingly, crucifi him.

15:15 and so pilate, will to content the people, releas barabbas
unto them, and deliv jesus, when he had scourg him, to be
crucified.

15:16 and the soldier led him away into the hall, call praetorium;
and they call togeth the whole band.

15:17 and they cloth him with purple, and plat a crown of thorns,
and put it about hi head, 15:18 and began to salut him, hail, king
of the jews!  15:19 and they smote him on the head with a reed, and
did spit upon him, and bow their knee worship him.

15:20 and when they had mock him, they took off the purpl from him,
and put hi own cloth on him, and led him out to crucifi him.

15:21 and they compel one simon a cyrenian, who pass by, come out
of the country, the father of alexand and rufus, to bear hi cross.

15:22 and they bring him unto the place golgotha, which is, being
interpreted, the place of a skull.

15:23 and they gave him to drink wine mingl with myrrh: but he
receiv it not.

15:24 and when they had crucifi him, they part hi garments,
cast lot upon them, what everi man should take.

15:25 and it wa the third hour, and they crucifi him.

15:26 and the superscript of hi accus wa written over, the
k OF the jews.

15:27 and with him they crucifi two thieves; the one on hi right
hand, and the other on hi left.

15:28 and the scriptur wa fulfilled, which saith, and he was
numb with the transgressors.

15:29 and they that pass by rail on him, wag their heads, and
saying, ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, 15:30 save thyself, and come down from the cross.

15:31 likewis also the chief priest mock said among themselves
with the scribes, He save others; himself he cannot save.

15:32 let christ the king of israel descend now from the cross, that
w may see and believe. and they that were crucifi with him reviled
him.

15:33 and when the sixth hour wa come, there wa dark over the
whol land until the ninth hour.

15:34 and at the ninth hour jesu cri with a loud voice, saying,
eloi, eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, be interpreted, My god, my
god, whi hast thou forsaken me?  15:35 and some of them that stood by,
when they heard it, said, behold, he calleth elias.

15:36 and one ran and fill a spung full of vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink, saying, let alone; let us see whether
elia will come to take him down.

15:37 and jesu cri with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.

15:38 and the veil of the templ wa rent in twain from the top to the
bottom.

15:39 and when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that
h so cri out, and gave up the ghost, he said, truli thi man was
th son of god.

15:40 there were also women look on afar off: among whom wa mary
magdalene, and mari the mother of jame the less and of joses, and
salome; 15:41 (who also, when he wa in galilee, follow him, and
minist unto him;) and mani other women which came up with him unto
jerusalem.

15:42 and now when the even wa come, becaus it wa the preparation,
that is, the day befor the sabbath, 15:43 joseph of arimathaea, an
honour counsellor, which also wait for the kingdom of god, came,
and went in boldli unto pilate, and crave the bodi of jesus.

15:44 and pilat marvel if he were alreadi dead: and call unto
him the centurion, he ask him whether he had been ani while dead.

15:45 and when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the bodi to
joseph.

15:46 and he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrap him in
th linen, and laid him in a sepulchr which wa hewn out of a rock,
and roll a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.

15:47 and mari magdalen and mari the mother of jose beheld where he
wa laid.

16:1 and when the sabbath wa past, mari magdalene, and mari the
moth of james, and salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might
com and anoint him.

16:2 and veri earli in the morn the first day of the week, they
cam unto the sepulchr at the rise of the sun.

16:3 and they said among themselves, who shall roll us away the stone
from the door of the sepulchre?  16:4 and when they looked, they saw
that the stone wa roll away: for it wa veri great.

16:5 and enter into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sit on
th right side, cloth in a long white garment; and they were
affrighted.

16:6 and he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek jesu of
nazareth, which wa crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the
plac where they laid him.

16:7 but go your way, tell hi discipl and peter that he goeth
befor you into galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

16:8 and they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they
trembl and were amazed: neither said they ani thing to ani man; for
they were afraid.

16:9 now when jesu wa risen earli the first day of the week, he
appear first to mari magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven
devils.

16:10 and she went and told them that had been with him, as they
mourn and wept.

16:11 and they, when they had heard that he wa alive, and had been
seen of her, believ not.

16:12 after that he appear in anoth form unto two of them, as they
walked, and went into the country.

16:13 and they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed
they them.

16:14 afterward he appear unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and
upbraid them with their unbelief and hard of heart, becaus they
believ not them which had seen him after he wa risen.

16:15 and he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to everi creature.

16:16 He that believeth and is baptiz shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned.

16:17 and these sign shall follow them that believe; In my name shall
they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; 16:18 they
shal take up serpents; and if they drink ani deadli thing, it shall
not hurt them; they shall lay hand on the sick, and they shall
recover.

16:19 So then after the lord had spoken unto them, he wa receiv up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of god.

16:20 and they went forth, and preach everi where, the lord working
with them, and confirm the word with sign following. amen.




th gospel accord to saint luke


1:1 forasmuch as mani have taken in hand to set forth in order a
declar of those thing which are most sure believ among us,
1:2 even as they deliv them unto us, which from the begin were
eyewitnesses, and minist of the word; 1:3 It seem good to me
also, have had perfect understand of all thing from the very
first, to write unto thee in order, most excel theophilus, 1:4
that thou mightest know the certainti of those things, wherein thou
hast been instructed.

1:5 there wa in the day of herod, the king of judaea, a certain
priest name zacharias, of the cours of abia: and hi wife wa of the
daught of aaron, and her name wa elisabeth.

1:6 and they were both righteou befor god, walk in all the
command and ordin of the lord blameless.

1:7 and they had no child, becaus that elisabeth wa barren, and they
both were now well stricken in years.

1:8 and it came to pass, that while he execut the priest' office
befor god in the order of hi course, 1:9 accord to the custom of
th priest' office, hi lot wa to burn incens when he went into the
templ of the lord.

1:10 and the whole multitud of the peopl were pray without at the
tim of incense.

1:11 and there appear unto him an angel of the lord stand on the
right side of the altar of incense.

1:12 and when zacharia saw him, he wa troubled, and fear fell upon
him.

1:13 but the angel said unto him, fear not, zacharias: for thi prayer
i heard; and thi wife elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt
cal hi name john.

1:14 and thou shalt have joy and gladness; and mani shall rejoic at
hi birth.

1:15 for he shall be great in the sight of the lord, and shall drink
neith wine nor strong drink; and he shall be fill with the holy
ghost, even from hi mother' womb.

1:16 and mani of the children of israel shall he turn to the lord
their god.

1:17 and he shall go befor him in the spirit and power of elias, to
turn the heart of the father to the children, and the disobedi to
th wisdom of the just; to make readi a peopl prepar for the lord.

1:18 and zacharia said unto the angel, wherebi shall I know this? for
i am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.

1:19 and the angel answer said unto him, I am gabriel, that stand
in the presenc of god; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew
the these glad tidings.

1:20 and, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not abl to speak, until the
day that these thing shall be performed, becaus thou believest not
mi words, which shall be fulfil in their season.

1:21 and the peopl wait for zacharias, and marvel that he
tarri so long in the temple.

1:22 and when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they
perceiv that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned
unto them, and remain speechless.

1:23 and it came to pass, that, as soon as the day of his
ministr were accomplished, he depart to hi own house.

1:24 and after those day hi wife elisabeth conceived, and hid
herself five months, saying, 1:25 thu hath the lord dealt with me in
th day wherein he look on me, to take away my reproach among men.

1:26 and in the sixth month the angel gabriel wa sent from god unto a
citi of galilee, name nazareth, 1:27 To a virgin espous to a man
whos name wa joseph, of the hous of david; and the virgin' name
wa mary.

1:28 and the angel came in unto her, and said, hail, thou that art
highli favoured, the lord is with thee: bless art thou among women.

1:29 and when she saw him, she wa troubl at hi saying, and cast in
her mind what manner of salut thi should be.

1:30 and the angel said unto her, fear not, mary: for thou hast found
favour with god.

1:31 and, behold, thou shalt conceiv in thi womb, and bring forth a
son, and shalt call hi name jesus.

1:32 He shall be great, and shall be call the son of the highest:
and the lord god shall give unto him the throne of hi father david:
1:33 and he shall reign over the hous of jacob for ever; and of his
kingdom there shall be no end.

1:34 then said mari unto the angel, how shall thi be, see I know
not a man?  1:35 and the angel answer and said unto her, the holy
ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee: therefor also that holi thing which shall be born of
the shall be call the son of god.

1:36 and, behold, thi cousin elisabeth, she hath also conceiv a son
in her old age: and thi is the sixth month with her, who wa called
barren.

1:37 for with god noth shall be impossible.

1:38 and mari said, behold the handmaid of the lord; be it unto me
accord to thi word. and the angel depart from her.

1:39 and mari aros in those days, and went into the hill countri with
haste, into a citi of juda; 1:40 and enter into the hous of
zacharias, and salut elisabeth.

1:41 and it came to pass, that, when elisabeth heard the salut of
mary, the babe leap in her womb; and elisabeth wa fill with the
holi ghost: 1:42 and she spake out with a loud voice, and said,
bless art thou among women, and bless is the fruit of thi womb.

1:43 and whenc is thi to me, that the mother of my lord should come
to me?  1:44 for, lo, as soon as the voic of thi salut sounded
in mine ears, the babe leap in my womb for joy.

1:45 and bless is she that believed: for there shall be a
perform of those thing which were told her from the lord.

1:46 and mari said, My soul doth magnifi the lord, 1:47 and my spirit
hath rejoic in god my saviour.

1:48 for he hath regard the low estat of hi handmaiden: for,
behold, from henceforth all gener shall call me blessed.

1:49 for he that is mighti hath done to me great things; and holi is
hi name.

1:50 and hi merci is on them that fear him from gener to
generation.

1:51 He hath shew strength with hi arm; he hath scatter the proud
in the imagin of their hearts.

1:52 He hath put down the mighti from their seats, and exalt them of
low degree.

1:53 He hath fill the hungri with good things; and the rich he hath
sent empti away.

1:54 He hath holpen hi servant israel, in remembr of hi mercy;
1:55 As he spake to our fathers, to abraham, and to hi seed for ever.

1:56 and mari abod with her about three months, and return to her
own house.

1:57 now elisabeth' full time came that she should be delivered; and
sh brought forth a son.

1:58 and her neighbour and her cousin heard how the lord had shewed
great merci upon her; and they rejoic with her.

1:59 and it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to
circumcis the child; and they call him zacharias, after the name of
hi father.

1:60 and hi mother answer and said, not so; but he shall be called
john.

1:61 and they said unto her, there is none of thi kindr that is
cal by thi name.

1:62 and they made sign to hi father, how he would have him called.

1:63 and he ask for a write table, and wrote, saying, hi name is
john. and they marvel all.

1:64 and hi mouth wa open immediately, and hi tongu loosed, and
h spake, and prais god.

1:65 and fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these
say were nois abroad throughout all the hill countri of judaea.

1:66 and all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts,
saying, what manner of child shall thi be! and the hand of the lord
wa with him.

1:67 and hi father zacharia wa fill with the holi ghost, and
prophesied, saying, 1:68 bless be the lord god of israel; for he
hath visit and redeem hi people, 1:69 and hath rais up an horn
of salvat for us in the hous of hi servant david; 1:70 As he
spak by the mouth of hi holi prophets, which have been sinc the
world began: 1:71 that we should be save from our enemies, and from
th hand of all that hate us; 1:72 To perform the merci promis to
our fathers, and to rememb hi holi covenant; 1:73 the oath which he
swar to our father abraham, 1:74 that he would grant unto us, that we
b deliv out of the hand of our enemi might serv him without
fear, 1:75 In holi and righteous befor him, all the day of
our life.

1:76 and thou, child, shalt be call the prophet of the highest: for
thou shalt go befor the face of the lord to prepar hi ways; 1:77 to
giv knowledg of salvat unto hi peopl by the remiss of their
sins, 1:78 through the tender merci of our god; wherebi the dayspring
from on high hath visit us, 1:79 To give light to them that sit in
dark and in the shadow of death, to guid our feet into the way of
peace.

1:80 and the child grew, and wax strong in spirit, and wa in the
desert till the day of hi shew unto israel.

2:1 and it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree
from caesar augustu that all the world should be taxed.

2:2 (and thi tax wa first made when cyreniu wa governor of
syria.)  2:3 and all went to be taxed, everi one into hi own city.

2:4 and joseph also went up from galilee, out of the citi of nazareth,
into judaea, unto the citi of david, which is call bethlehem;
(becaus he wa of the hous and lineag of david:) 2:5 To be taxed
with mari hi espous wife, be great with child.

2:6 and so it was, that, while they were there, the day were
accomplish that she should be delivered.

2:7 and she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrap him in
swaddl clothes, and laid him in a manger; becaus there wa no room
for them in the inn.

2:8 and there were in the same countri shepherd abid in the field,
keep watch over their flock by night.

2:9 and, lo, the angel of the lord came upon them, and the glori of
th lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.

2:10 and the angel said unto them, fear not: for, behold, I bring you
good tide of great joy, which shall be to all people.

2:11 for unto you is born thi day in the citi of david a saviour,
which is christ the lord.

2:12 and thi shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped
in swaddl clothes, lie in a manger.

2:13 and suddenli there wa with the angel a multitud of the heavenly
host prais god, and saying, 2:14 glori to god in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men.

2:15 and it came to pass, as the angel were gone away from them into
heaven, the shepherd said one to another, let us now go even unto
bethlehem, and see thi thing which is come to pass, which the lord
hath made known unto us.

2:16 and they came with haste, and found mary, and joseph, and the
bab lie in a manger.

2:17 and when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying
which wa told them concern thi child.

2:18 and all they that heard it wonder at those thing which were
told them by the shepherds.

2:19 but mari kept all these things, and ponder them in her heart.

2:20 and the shepherd returned, glorifi and prais god for all
th thing that they had heard and seen, as it wa told unto them.

2:21 and when eight day were accomplish for the circumcis of the
child, hi name wa call jesus, which wa so name of the angel
befor he wa conceiv in the womb.

2:22 and when the day of her purif accord to the law of
mos were accomplished, they brought him to jerusalem, to present him
to the lord; 2:23 (a it is written in the law of the lord, everi male
that openeth the womb shall be call holi to the lord;) 2:24 and to
off a sacrific accord to that which is said in the law of the
lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.

2:25 and, behold, there wa a man in jerusalem, whose name wa simeon;
and the same man wa just and devout, wait for the consol of
israel: and the holi ghost wa upon him.

2:26 and it wa reveal unto him by the holi ghost, that he should
not see death, befor he had seen the lord' christ.

2:27 and he came by the spirit into the temple: and when the parents
brought in the child jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,
2:28 then took he him up in hi arms, and bless god, and said, 2:29
lord, now lettest thou thi servant depart in peace, accord to thy
word: 2:30 for mine eye have seen thi salvation, 2:31 which thou hast
prepar befor the face of all people; 2:32 A light to lighten the
gentiles, and the glori of thi peopl israel.

2:33 and joseph and hi mother marvel at those thing which were
spoken of him.

2:34 and simeon bless them, and said unto mari hi mother, behold,
thi child is set for the fall and rise again of mani in israel; and
for a sign which shall be spoken against; 2:35 (yea, a sword shall
pierc through thi own soul also,) that the thought of mani hearts
may be revealed.

2:36 and there wa one anna, a prophetess, the daughter of phanuel, of
th tribe of aser: she wa of a great age, and had live with an
husband seven year from her virginity; 2:37 and she wa a widow of
about fourscor and four years, which depart not from the temple,
but serv god with fast and prayer night and day.

2:38 and she come in that instant gave thank likewis unto the
lord, and spake of him to all them that look for redempt in
jerusalem.

2:39 and when they had perform all thing accord to the law of
th lord, they return into galilee, to their own citi nazareth.

2:40 and the child grew, and wax strong in spirit, fill with
wisdom: and the grace of god wa upon him.

2:41 now hi parent went to jerusalem everi year at the feast of the
passover.

2:42 and when he wa twelv year old, they went up to jerusalem after
th custom of the feast.

2:43 and when they had fulfil the days, as they returned, the child
jesu tarri behind in jerusalem; and joseph and hi mother knew not
of it.

2:44 but they, suppos him to have been in the company, went a day's
journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.

2:45 and when they found him not, they turn back again to jerusalem,
seek him.

2:46 and it came to pass, that after three day they found him in the
temple, sit in the midst of the doctors, both hear them, and
ask them questions.

2:47 and all that heard him were astonish at hi understand and
answers.

2:48 and when they saw him, they were amazed: and hi mother said unto
him, son, whi hast thou thu dealt with us? behold, thi father and i
hav sought thee sorrowing.

2:49 and he said unto them, how is it that ye sought me? wist ye not
that I must be about my father' business?  2:50 and they understood
not the say which he spake unto them.

2:51 and he went down with them, and came to nazareth, and wa subject
unto them: but hi mother kept all these say in her heart.

2:52 and jesu increas in wisdom and stature, and in favour with god
and man.

3:1 now in the fifteenth year of the reign of tiberiu caesar, pontius
pil be governor of judaea, and herod be tetrarch of galilee,
and hi brother philip tetrarch of ituraea and of the region of
trachonitis, and lysania the tetrarch of abilene, 3:2 anna and
caiapha be the high priests, the word of god came unto john the
son of zacharia in the wilderness.

3:3 and he came into all the countri about jordan, preach the
bapt of repent for the remiss of sins; 3:4 As it is written
in the book of the word of esaia the prophet, saying, the voic of
on cri in the wilderness, prepar ye the way of the lord, make his
path straight.

3:5 everi valley shall be filled, and everi mountain and hill shall be
brought low; and the crook shall be made straight, and the rough
way shall be made smooth; 3:6 and all flesh shall see the salvation
of god.

3:7 then said he to the multitud that came forth to be baptiz of
him, O gener of vipers, who hath warn you to flee from the
wrath to come?  3:8 bring forth therefor fruit worthi of repentance,
and begin not to say within yourselves, We have abraham to our father:
for I say unto you, that god is abl of these stone to rais up
children unto abraham.

3:9 and now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every
tre therefor which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

3:10 and the peopl ask him, saying, what shall we do then?  3:11 he
answereth and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart
to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.

3:12 then came also publican to be baptized, and said unto him,
master, what shall we do?  3:13 and he said unto them, exact no more
than that which is appoint you.

3:14 and the soldier likewis demand of him, saying, and what shall
w do? and he said unto them, Do violenc to no man, neither accuse
ani falsely; and be content with your wages.

3:15 and as the peopl were in expectation, and all men muse in their
heart of john, whether he were the christ, or not; 3:16 john
answered, say unto them all, I inde baptiz you with water; but
on mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy
to unloose: he shall baptiz you with the holi ghost and with fire:
3:17 whose fan is in hi hand, and he will throughli purg hi floor,
and will gather the wheat into hi garner; but the chaff he will burn
with fire unquenchable.

3:18 and mani other thing in hi exhort preach he unto the
people.

3:19 but herod the tetrarch, be reprov by him for herodia his
broth philip' wife, and for all the evil which herod had done,
3:20 ad yet thi abov all, that he shut up john in prison.

3:21 now when all the peopl were baptized, it came to pass, that
jesu also be baptized, and praying, the heaven wa opened, 3:22
and the holi ghost descend in a bodili shape like a dove upon him,
and a voic came from heaven, which said, thou art my belov son; in
the I am well pleased.

3:23 and jesu himself began to be about thirti year of age, being
(a wa supposed) the son of joseph, which wa the son of heli, 3:24
which wa the son of matthat, which wa the son of levi, which wa the
son of melchi, which wa the son of janna, which wa the son of
joseph, 3:25 which wa the son of mattathias, which wa the son of
amos, which wa the son of naum, which wa the son of esli, which was
th son of nagge, 3:26 which wa the son of maath, which wa the son
of mattathias, which wa the son of semei, which wa the son of
joseph, which wa the son of juda, 3:27 which wa the son of joanna,
which wa the son of rhesa, which wa the son of zorobabel, which was
th son of salathiel, which wa the son of neri, 3:28 which wa the
son of melchi, which wa the son of addi, which wa the son of cosam,
which wa the son of elmodam, which wa the son of er, 3:29 which was
th son of jose, which wa the son of eliezer, which wa the son of
jorim, which wa the son of matthat, which wa the son of levi, 3:30
which wa the son of simeon, which wa the son of juda, which wa the
son of joseph, which wa the son of jonan, which wa the son of
eliakim, 3:31 which wa the son of melea, which wa the son of menan,
which wa the son of mattatha, which wa the son of nathan, which was
th son of david, 3:32 which wa the son of jesse, which wa the son
of obed, which wa the son of booz, which wa the son of salmon, which
wa the son of naasson, 3:33 which wa the son of aminadab, which was
th son of aram, which wa the son of esrom, which wa the son of
phares, which wa the son of juda, 3:34 which wa the son of jacob,
which wa the son of isaac, which wa the son of abraham, which was
th son of thara, which wa the son of nachor, 3:35 which wa the son
of saruch, which wa the son of ragau, which wa the son of phalec,
which wa the son of heber, which wa the son of sala, 3:36 which was
th son of cainan, which wa the son of arphaxad, which wa the son of
sem, which wa the son of noe, which wa the son of lamech, 3:37 which
wa the son of mathusala, which wa the son of enoch, which wa the
son of jared, which wa the son of maleleel, which wa the son of
cainan, 3:38 which wa the son of enos, which wa the son of seth,
which wa the son of adam, which wa the son of god.

4:1 and jesu be full of the holi ghost return from jordan, and
wa led by the spirit into the wilderness, 4:2 be forti days
tempt of the devil. and in those day he did eat nothing: and when
they were ended, he afterward hungered.

4:3 and the devil said unto him, If thou be the son of god, command
thi stone that it be made bread.

4:4 and jesu answer him, saying, It is written, that man shall not
liv by bread alone, but by everi word of god.

4:5 and the devil, take him up into an high mountain, shew unto
him all the kingdom of the world in a moment of time.

4:6 and the devil said unto him, all thi power will I give thee, and
th glori of them: for that is deliv unto me; and to whomsoev i
wil I give it.

4:7 If thou therefor wilt worship me, all shall be thine.

4:8 and jesu answer and said unto him, get thee behind me, satan:
for it is written, thou shalt worship the lord thi god, and him only
shalt thou serve.

4:9 and he brought him to jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacl of the
temple, and said unto him, If thou be the son of god, cast thyself
down from hence: 4:10 for it is written, He shall give hi angels
charg over thee, to keep thee: 4:11 and in their hand they shall
bear thee up, lest at ani time thou dash thi foot against a stone.

4:12 and jesu answer said unto him, It is said, thou shalt not
tempt the lord thi god.

4:13 and when the devil had end all the temptation, he depart from
him for a season.

4:14 and jesu return in the power of the spirit into galilee: and
ther went out a fame of him through all the region round about.

4:15 and he taught in their synagogues, be glorifi of all.

4:16 and he came to nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as
hi custom was, he went into the synagogu on the sabbath day, and
stood up for to read.

4:17 and there wa deliv unto him the book of the prophet esaias.
and when he had open the book, he found the place where it was
written, 4:18 the spirit of the lord is upon me, becaus he hath
anoint me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal
th brokenhearted, to preach deliver to the captives, and
recov of sight to the blind, to set at liberti them that are
bruised, 4:19 To preach the accept year of the lord.

4:20 and he close the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and
sat down. and the eye of all them that were in the synagogu were
fasten on him.

4:21 and he began to say unto them, thi day is thi scripture
fulfil in your ears.

4:22 and all bare him witness, and wonder at the graciou words
which proceed out of hi mouth. and they said, Is not thi joseph's
son?  4:23 and he said unto them, Ye will sure say unto me this
proverb, physician, heal thyself: whatsoev we have heard done in
capernaum, do also here in thi country.

4:24 and he said, verili I say unto you, No prophet is accept in his
own country.

4:25 but I tell you of a truth, mani widow were in israel in the days
of elias, when the heaven wa shut up three year and six months, when
great famin wa throughout all the land; 4:26 but unto none of them
wa elia sent, save unto sarepta, a citi of sidon, unto a woman that
wa a widow.

4:27 and mani leper were in israel in the time of eliseu the
prophet; and none of them wa cleansed, save naaman the syrian.

4:28 and all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were
fil with wrath, 4:29 and rose up, and thrust him out of the city,
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their citi wa built,
that they might cast him down headlong.

4:30 but he pass through the midst of them went hi way, 4:31 and
cam down to capernaum, a citi of galilee, and taught them on the
sabbath days.

4:32 and they were astonish at hi doctrine: for hi word wa with
power.

4:33 and in the synagogu there wa a man, which had a spirit of an
unclean devil, and cri out with a loud voice, 4:34 saying, let us
alone; what have we to do with thee, thou jesu of nazareth? art thou
com to destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the holi one of god.

4:35 and jesu rebuk him, saying, hold thi peace, and come out of
him.

and when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him,
and hurt him not.

4:36 and they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying,
what a word is this! for with author and power he commandeth the
unclean spirits, and they come out.

4:37 and the fame of him went out into everi place of the country
round about.

4:38 and he aros out of the synagogue, and enter into simon's
house.

and simon' wife' mother wa taken with a great fever; and they
besought him for her.

4:39 and he stood over her, and rebuk the fever; and it left her:
and immedi she aros and minist unto them.

4:40 now when the sun wa setting, all they that had ani sick with
div diseas brought them unto him; and he laid hi hand on every
on of them, and heal them.

4:41 and devil also came out of many, cri out, and saying, thou
art christ the son of god. and he rebuk them suffer them not to
speak: for they knew that he wa christ.

4:42 and when it wa day, he depart and went into a desert place:
and the peopl sought him, and came unto him, and stay him, that he
should not depart from them.

4:43 and he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of god to other
c also: for therefor am I sent.

4:44 and he preach in the synagogu of galilee.

5:1 and it came to pass, that, as the peopl press upon him to hear
th word of god, he stood by the lake of gennesaret, 5:2 and saw two
ship stand by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them,
and were wash their nets.

5:3 and he enter into one of the ships, which wa simon's, and
pray him that he would thrust out a littl from the land. and he sat
down, and taught the peopl out of the ship.

5:4 now when he had left speaking, he said unto simon, launch out into
th deep, and let down your net for a draught.

5:5 and simon answer said unto him, master, we have toil all the
night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thi word I will let
down the net.

5:6 and when they had thi done, they inclos a great multitud of
fishes: and their net brake.

5:7 and they beckon unto their partners, which were in the other
ship, that they should come and help them. and they came, and filled
both the ships, so that they began to sink.

5:8 when simon peter saw it, he fell down at jesus' knees, saying,
depart from me; for I am a sin man, O lord.

5:9 for he wa astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught
of the fish which they had taken: 5:10 and so wa also james, and
john, the son of zebedee, which were partner with simon. and jesus
said unto simon, fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.

5:11 and when they had brought their ship to land, they forsook all,
and follow him.

5:12 and it came to pass, when he wa in a certain city, behold a man
ful of leprosy: who see jesu fell on hi face, and besought him,
saying, lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

5:13 and he put forth hi hand, and touch him, saying, I will: be
thou clean. and immedi the leprosi depart from him.

5:14 and he charg him to tell no man: but go, and shew thyself to
th priest, and offer for thi cleansing, accord as mose commanded,
for a testimoni unto them.

5:15 but so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great
multitud came togeth to hear, and to be heal by him of their
infirmities.

5:16 and he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed.

5:17 and it came to pass on a certain day, as he wa teaching, that
ther were pharise and doctor of the law sit by, which were
com out of everi town of galilee, and judaea, and jerusalem: and the
pow of the lord wa present to heal them.

5:18 and, behold, men brought in a bed a man which wa taken with a
palsy: and they sought mean to bring him in, and to lay him before
him.

5:19 and when they could not find by what way they might bring him in
becaus of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him
down through the tile with hi couch into the midst befor jesus.

5:20 and when he saw their faith, he said unto him, man, thi sin are
forgiven thee.

5:21 and the scribe and the pharise began to reason, saying, who is
thi which speaketh blasphemies? who can forgiv sins, but god alone?
5:22 but when jesu perceiv their thoughts, he answer said unto
them, what reason ye in your hearts?  5:23 whether is easier, to say,
thi sin be forgiven thee; or to say, rise up and walk?  5:24 but that
y may know that the son of man hath power upon earth to forgiv sins,
(h said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, arise, and take
up thi couch, and go into thine house.

5:25 and immedi he rose up befor them, and took up that whereon
h lay, and depart to hi own house, glorifi god.

5:26 and they were all amazed, and they glorifi god, and were filled
with fear, saying, We have seen strang thing to day.

5:27 and after these thing he went forth, and saw a publican, named
levi, sit at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, follow
me.

5:28 and he left all, rose up, and follow him.

5:29 and levi made him a great feast in hi own house: and there wa a
great compani of publican and of other that sat down with them.

5:30 but their scribe and pharise murmur against hi disciples,
saying, whi do ye eat and drink with publican and sinners?  5:31 and
jesu answer said unto them, they that are whole need not a
physician; but they that are sick.

5:32 I came not to call the righteous, but sinner to repentance.

5:33 and they said unto him, whi do the discipl of john fast often,
and make prayers, and likewis the discipl of the pharisees; but
thin eat and drink?  5:34 and he said unto them, can ye make the
children of the bridechamb fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
5:35 but the day will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

5:36 and he spake also a parabl unto them; No man putteth a piec of
a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a
rent, and the piec that wa taken out of the new agreeth not with the
old.

5:37 and no man putteth new wine into old bottles; els the new wine
wil burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottl shall perish.

5:38 but new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are
preserved.

5:39 No man also have drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for
h saith, the old is better.

6:1 and it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he
went through the corn fields; and hi discipl pluck the ear of
corn, and did eat, rub them in their hands.

6:2 and certain of the pharise said unto them, whi do ye that which
i not law to do on the sabbath days?  6:3 and jesu answer them
said, have ye not read so much as this, what david did, when himself
wa an hungred, and they which were with him; 6:4 how he went into the
hous of god, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to
them that were with him; which it is not law to eat but for the
priest alone?  6:5 and he said unto them, that the son of man is lord
also of the sabbath.

6:6 and it came to pass also on anoth sabbath, that he enter into
th synagogu and taught: and there wa a man whose right hand was
withered.

6:7 and the scribe and pharise watch him, whether he would heal
on the sabbath day; that they might find an accus against him.

6:8 but he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the
with hand, rise up, and stand forth in the midst. and he aros and
stood forth.

6:9 then said jesu unto them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful
on the sabbath day to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to
destroy it?  6:10 and look round about upon them all, he said unto
th man, stretch forth thi hand. and he did so: and hi hand was
restor whole as the other.

6:11 and they were fill with madness; and commun one with another
what they might do to jesus.

6:12 and it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray, and continu all night in prayer to god.

6:13 and when it wa day, he call unto him hi disciples: and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he name apostles; 6:14 simon, (whom
h also name peter,) and andrew hi brother, jame and john, philip
and bartholomew, 6:15 matthew and thomas, jame the son of alphaeus,
and simon call zelotes, 6:16 and juda the brother of james, and
juda iscariot, which also wa the traitor.

6:17 and he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the
compani of hi disciples, and a great multitud of peopl out of all
judaea and jerusalem, and from the sea coast of tyre and sidon, which
cam to hear him, and to be heal of their diseases; 6:18 and they
that were vex with unclean spirits: and they were healed.

6:19 and the whole multitud sought to touch him: for there went
virtu out of him, and heal them all.

6:20 and he lift up hi eye on hi disciples, and said, bless be
y poor: for your is the kingdom of god.

6:21 bless are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. blessed
ar ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.

6:22 bless are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separ you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out
your name as evil, for the son of man' sake.

6:23 rejoic ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your
reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers
unto the prophets.

6:24 but woe unto you that are rich! for ye have receiv your
consolation.

6:25 woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. woe unto you
that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.

6:26 woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did
their father to the fals prophets.

6:27 but I say unto you which hear, love your enemies, do good to them
which hate you, 6:28 bless them that curs you, and pray for them
which despit use you.

6:29 and unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the
other; and him that taketh away thi cloak forbid not to take thi coat
also.

6:30 give to everi man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh
away thi good ask them not again.

6:31 and as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise.

6:32 for if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for
sinn also love those that love them.

6:33 and if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have
ye?  for sinner also do even the same.

6:34 and if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank
hav ye? for sinner also lend to sinners, to receiv as much again.

6:35 but love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hope for
noth again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the
children of the highest: for he is kind unto the unthank and to the
evil.

6:36 Be ye therefor merciful, as your father also is merciful.

6:37 judg not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall
not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: 6:38 give, and it
shal be given unto you; good measure, press down, and shaken
together, and run over, shall men give into your bosom. for with
th same measur that ye mete withal it shall be measur to you
again.

6:39 and he spake a parabl unto them, can the blind lead the blind?
shal they not both fall into the ditch?  6:40 the discipl is not
abov hi master: but everi one that is perfect shall be as his
master.

6:41 and whi beholdest thou the mote that is in thi brother' eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?  6:42 either how
canst thou say to thi brother, brother, let me pull out the mote that
i in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in
thin own eye? thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shalt thou see clearli to pull out the mote that is
in thi brother' eye.

6:43 for a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

6:44 for everi tree is known by hi own fruit. for of thorn men do
not gather figs, nor of a brambl bush gather they grapes.

6:45 A good man out of the good treasur of hi heart bringeth forth
that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasur of his
heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abund of the
heart hi mouth speaketh.

6:46 and whi call ye me, lord, lord, and do not the thing which i
say?  6:47 whosoev cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth
them, I will shew you to whom he is like: 6:48 He is like a man which
built an house, and dig deep, and laid the foundat on a rock:
and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehement upon that house,
and could not shake it: for it wa found upon a rock.

6:49 but he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a
found built an hous upon the earth; against which the stream did
beat vehemently, and immedi it fell; and the ruin of that house
wa great.

7:1 now when he had end all hi say in the audienc of the
people, he enter into capernaum.

7:2 and a certain centurion' servant, who wa dear unto him, was
sick, and readi to die.

7:3 and when he heard of jesus, he sent unto him the elder of the
jews, beseech him that he would come and heal hi servant.

7:4 and when they came to jesus, they besought him instantly, saying,
that he wa worthi for whom he should do this: 7:5 for he loveth our
nation, and he hath built us a synagogue.

7:6 then jesu went with them. and when he wa now not far from the
house, the centurion sent friend to him, say unto him, lord,
troubl not thyself: for I am not worthi that thou shouldest enter
und my roof: 7:7 wherefor neither thought I myself worthi to come
unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.

7:8 for I also am a man set under authority, have under me soldiers,
and I say unto one, go, and he goeth; and to another, come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.

7:9 when jesu heard these things, he marvel at him, and turn him
about, and said unto the peopl that follow him, I say unto you, i
hav not found so great faith, no, not in israel.

7:10 and they that were sent, return to the house, found the
serv whole that had been sick.

7:11 and it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city
cal nain; and mani of hi discipl went with him, and much people.

7:12 now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was
a dead man carri out, the onli son of hi mother, and she wa a
widow: and much peopl of the citi wa with her.

7:13 and when the lord saw her, he had compass on her, and said
unto her, weep not.

7:14 and he came and touch the bier: and they that bare him stood
still.

and he said, young man, I say unto thee, arise.

7:15 and he that wa dead sat up, and began to speak. and he delivered
him to hi mother.

7:16 and there came a fear on all: and they glorifi god, saying,
that a great prophet is risen up among us; and, that god hath visited
hi people.

7:17 and thi rumour of him went forth throughout all judaea, and
throughout all the region round about.

7:18 and the discipl of john shew him of all these things.

7:19 and john call unto him two of hi discipl sent them to
jesus, saying, art thou he that should come? or look we for another?
7:20 when the men were come unto him, they said, john baptist hath
sent us unto thee, saying, art thou he that should come? or look we
for another?  7:21 and in that same hour he cure mani of their
infirm and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto mani that were
blind he gave sight.

7:22 then jesu answer said unto them, Go your way, and tell john
what thing ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame
walk, the leper are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to
th poor the gospel is preached.

7:23 and bless is he, whosoev shall not be offend in me.

7:24 and when the messeng of john were departed, he began to speak
unto the peopl concern john, what went ye out into the wilderness
for to see?  A reed shaken with the wind?  7:25 but what went ye out
for to see? A man cloth in soft raiment?  behold, they which are
gorg apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts.

7:26 but what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you,
and much more than a prophet.

7:27 thi is he, of whom it is written, behold, I send my messenger
befor thi face, which shall prepar thi way befor thee.

7:28 for I say unto you, among those that are born of women there is
not a greater prophet than john the baptist: but he that is least in
th kingdom of god is greater than he.

7:29 and all the peopl that heard him, and the publicans, justified
god, be baptiz with the baptism of john.

7:30 but the pharise and lawyer reject the counsel of god against
themselves, be not baptiz of him.

7:31 and the lord said, whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
generation? and to what are they like?  7:32 they are like unto
children sit in the marketplace, and call one to another, and
saying, We have pipe unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourn to you, and ye have not wept.

7:33 for john the baptist came neither eat bread nor drink wine;
and ye say, He hath a devil.

7:34 the son of man is come eat and drinking; and ye say, behold a
glutton man, and a winebibber, a friend of publican and sinners!
7:35 but wisdom is justifi of all her children.

7:36 and one of the pharise desir him that he would eat with him.
and he went into the pharisee' house, and sat down to meat.

7:37 and, behold, a woman in the city, which wa a sinner, when she
knew that jesu sat at meat in the pharisee' house, brought an
alabast box of ointment, 7:38 and stood at hi feet behind him
weeping, and began to wash hi feet with tears, and did wipe them with
th hair of her head, and kiss hi feet, and anoint them with the
ointment.

7:39 now when the pharise which had bidden him saw it, he spake
within himself, saying, thi man, if he were a prophet, would have
known who and what manner of woman thi is that toucheth him: for she
i a sinner.

7:40 and jesu answer said unto him, simon, I have somewhat to say
unto thee. and he saith, master, say on.

7:41 there wa a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed
f hundr pence, and the other fifty.

7:42 and when they had noth to pay, he frankli forgav them both.
tel me therefore, which of them will love him most?  7:43 simon
answ and said, I suppos that he, to whom he forgav most.

and he said unto him, thou hast rightli judged.

7:44 and he turn to the woman, and said unto simon, seest thou this
woman? I enter into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my
feet: but she hath wash my feet with tears, and wipe them with the
hair of her head.

7:45 thou gavest me no kiss: but thi woman sinc the time I came in
hath not ceas to kiss my feet.

7:46 My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but thi woman hath
anoint my feet with ointment.

7:47 wherefor I say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she love much: but to whom littl is forgiven, the same
loveth little.

7:48 and he said unto her, thi sin are forgiven.

7:49 and they that sat at meat with him began to say within
themselves, who is thi that forgiveth sin also?  7:50 and he said to
th woman, thi faith hath save thee; go in peace.

8:1 and it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout everi city
and village, preach and shew the glad tide of the kingdom of
god: and the twelv were with him, 8:2 and certain women, which had
been heal of evil spirit and infirmities, mari call magdalene,
out of whom went seven devils, 8:3 and joanna the wife of chuza
herod' steward, and susanna, and mani others, which minist unto
him of their substance.

8:4 and when much peopl were gather together, and were come to him
out of everi city, he spake by a parable: 8:5 A sower went out to sow
hi seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was
trodden down, and the fowl of the air devour it.

8:6 and some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it wa sprung up, it
with away, becaus it lack moisture.

8:7 and some fell among thorns; and the thorn sprang up with it, and
chok it.

8:8 and other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an
hundredfold. and when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath
ear to hear, let him hear.

8:9 and hi discipl ask him, saying, what might thi parabl be?
8:10 and he said, unto you it is given to know the mysteri of the
kingdom of god: but to other in parables; that see they might not
see, and hear they might not understand.

8:11 now the parabl is this: the seed is the word of god.

8:12 those by the way side are they that hear; then cometh the devil,
and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe
and be saved.

8:13 they on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receiv the
word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and
in time of temptat fall away.

8:14 and that which fell among thorn are they, which, when they have
heard, go forth, and are choke with care and rich and pleasur of
thi life, and bring no fruit to perfection.

8:15 but that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good
heart, have heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience.

8:16 No man, when he hath light a candle, covereth it with a vessel,
or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they
which enter in may see the light.

8:17 for noth is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither
ani thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.

8:18 take heed therefor how ye hear: for whosoev hath, to him shall
b given; and whosoev hath not, from him shall be taken even that
which he seemeth to have.

8:19 then came to him hi mother and hi brethren, and could not come
at him for the press.

8:20 and it wa told him by certain which said, thi mother and thy
brethren stand without, desir to see thee.

8:21 and he answer and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are
thes which hear the word of god, and do it.

8:22 now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship
with hi disciples: and he said unto them, let us go over unto the
oth side of the lake. and they launch forth.

8:23 but as they sail he fell asleep: and there came down a storm of
wind on the lake; and they were fill with water, and were in
jeopardy.

8:24 and they came to him, and awok him, saying, master, master, we
perish. then he arose, and rebuk the wind and the rage of the
water: and they ceased, and there wa a calm.

8:25 and he said unto them, where is your faith? and they be afraid
wondered, say one to another, what manner of man is this! for he
commandeth even the wind and water, and they obey him.

8:26 and they arriv at the countri of the gadarenes, which is over
against galilee.

8:27 and when he went forth to land, there met him out of the citi a
certain man, which had devil long time, and ware no clothes, neither
abod in ani house, but in the tombs.

8:28 when he saw jesus, he cri out, and fell down befor him, and
with a loud voic said, what have I to do with thee, jesus, thou son
of god most high? I beseech thee, torment me not.

8:29 (for he had command the unclean spirit to come out of the man.
for oftentim it had caught him: and he wa kept bound with chains
and in fetters; and he brake the bands, and wa driven of the devil
into the wilderness.)  8:30 and jesu ask him, saying, what is thy
name? and he said, legion: becaus mani devil were enter into him.

8:31 and they besought him that he would not command them to go out
into the deep.

8:32 and there wa there an herd of mani swine feed on the
mountain: and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter
into them. and he suffer them.

8:33 then went the devil out of the man, and enter into the swine:
and the herd ran violent down a steep place into the lake, and were
choked.

8:34 when they that fed them saw what wa done, they fled, and went
and told it in the citi and in the country.

8:35 then they went out to see what wa done; and came to jesus, and
found the man, out of whom the devil were departed, sit at the
feet of jesus, clothed, and in hi right mind: and they were afraid.

8:36 they also which saw it told them by what mean he that was
possess of the devil wa healed.

8:37 then the whole multitud of the countri of the gadaren round
about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great
fear: and he went up into the ship, and return back again.

8:38 now the man out of whom the devil were depart besought him
that he might be with him: but jesu sent him away, saying, 8:39
return to thine own house, and shew how great thing god hath done
unto thee. and he went hi way, and publish throughout the whole
c how great thing jesu had done unto him.

8:40 and it came to pass, that, when jesu wa returned, the people
gladli receiv him: for they were all wait for him.

8:41 and, behold, there came a man name jairus, and he wa a ruler of
th synagogue: and he fell down at jesus' feet, and besought him that
h would come into hi house: 8:42 for he had one onli daughter, about
twelv year of age, and she lay a dying. but as he went the people
throng him.

8:43 and a woman have an issu of blood twelv years, which had
spent all her live upon physicians, neither could be heal of any,
8:44 came behind him, and touch the border of hi garment: and
immedi her issu of blood stanched.

8:45 and jesu said, who touch me? when all denied, peter and they
that were with him said, master, the multitud throng thee and press
thee, and sayest thou, who touch me?  8:46 and jesu said, somebody
hath touch me: for I perceiv that virtu is gone out of me.

8:47 and when the woman saw that she wa not hid, she came trembling,
and fall down befor him, she declar unto him befor all the
peopl for what caus she had touch him, and how she wa healed
immediately.

8:48 and he said unto her, daughter, be of good comfort: thi faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace.

8:49 while he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the
synagogue' house, say to him, thi daughter is dead; troubl not
th master.

8:50 but when jesu heard it, he answer him, saying, fear not:
believ only, and she shall be made whole.

8:51 and when he came into the house, he suffer no man to go in,
sav peter, and james, and john, and the father and the mother of the
maiden.

8:52 and all wept, and bewail her: but he said, weep not; she is not
dead, but sleepeth.

8:53 and they laugh him to scorn, know that she wa dead.

8:54 and he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called,
saying, maid, arise.

8:55 and her spirit came again, and she aros straightway: and he
command to give her meat.

8:56 and her parent were astonished: but he charg them that they
should tell no man what wa done.

9:1 then he call hi twelv discipl together, and gave them power
and author over all devils, and to cure diseases.

9:2 and he sent them to preach the kingdom of god, and to heal the
sick.

9:3 and he said unto them, take noth for your journey, neither
staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two
coat apiece.

9:4 and whatsoev hous ye enter into, there abide, and thence
depart.

9:5 and whosoev will not receiv you, when ye go out of that city,
shak off the veri dust from your feet for a testimoni against them.

9:6 and they departed, and went through the towns, preach the
gospel, and heal everi where.

9:7 now herod the tetrarch heard of all that wa done by him: and he
wa perplexed, becaus that it wa said of some, that john wa risen
from the dead; 9:8 and of some, that elia had appeared; and of
others, that one of the old prophet wa risen again.

9:9 and herod said, john have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom i
hear such things? and he desir to see him.

9:10 and the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they
had done. and he took them, and went asid privat into a desert
plac belong to the citi call bethsaida.

9:11 and the people, when they knew it, follow him: and he received
them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of god, and heal them that
had need of healing.

9:12 and when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and
said unto him, send the multitud away, that they may go into the
town and countri round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are
her in a desert place.

9:13 but he said unto them, give ye them to eat. and they said, we
hav no more but five loav and two fishes; except we should go and
buy meat for all thi people.

9:14 for they were about five thousand men. and he said to his
disciples, make them sit down by fifti in a company.

9:15 and they did so, and made them all sit down.

9:16 then he took the five loav and the two fishes, and look up
to heaven, he bless them, and brake, and gave to the discipl to
set befor the multitude.

9:17 and they did eat, and were all filled: and there wa taken up of
frag that remain to them twelv baskets.

9:18 and it came to pass, as he wa alon praying, hi discipl were
with him: and he ask them, saying, whom say the peopl that I am?
9:19 they answer said, john the baptist; but some say, elias; and
oth say, that one of the old prophet is risen again.

9:20 He said unto them, but whom say ye that I am? peter answering
said, the christ of god.

9:21 and he straitli charg them, and command them to tell no man
that thing; 9:22 saying, the son of man must suffer mani things, and
b reject of the elder and chief priest and scribes, and be slain,
and be rais the third day.

9:23 and he said to them all, If ani man will come after me, let him
deni himself, and take up hi cross daily, and follow me.

9:24 for whosoev will save hi life shall lose it: but whosoever
wil lose hi life for my sake, the same shall save it.

9:25 for what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and
los himself, or be cast away?  9:26 for whosoev shall be asham of
m and of my words, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he
shal come in hi own glory, and in hi father's, and of the holy
angels.

9:27 but I tell you of a truth, there be some stand here, which
shal not tast of death, till they see the kingdom of god.

9:28 and it came to pass about an eight day after these sayings, he
took peter and john and james, and went up into a mountain to pray.

9:29 and as he prayed, the fashion of hi counten wa altered, and
hi raiment wa white and glistering.

9:30 and, behold, there talk with him two men, which were mose and
elias: 9:31 who appear in glory, and spake of hi deceas which he
should accomplish at jerusalem.

9:32 but peter and they that were with him were heavi with sleep: and
when they were awake, they saw hi glory, and the two men that stood
with him.

9:33 and it came to pass, as they depart from him, peter said unto
jesus, master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for moses, and one for elias: not
know what he said.

9:34 while he thu spake, there came a cloud, and overshadow them:
and they fear as they enter into the cloud.

9:35 and there came a voic out of the cloud, saying, thi is my
belov son: hear him.

9:36 and when the voic wa past, jesu wa found alone. and they kept
it close, and told no man in those day ani of those thing which they
had seen.

9:37 and it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come
down from the hill, much peopl met him.

9:38 and, behold, a man of the compani cri out, saying, master, i
beseech thee, look upon my son: for he is mine onli child.

9:39 and, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenli crieth out; and it
teareth him that he foameth again, and bruis him hardli departeth
from him.

9:40 and I besought thi discipl to cast him out; and they could not.

9:41 and jesu answer said, O faithless and pervers generation,
how long shall I be with you, and suffer you? bring thi son hither.

9:42 and as he wa yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare
him.

and jesu rebuk the unclean spirit, and heal the child, and
deliv him again to hi father.

9:43 and they were all amaz at the mighti power of god. but while
they wonder everi one at all thing which jesu did, he said unto
hi disciples, 9:44 let these say sink down into your ears: for
th son of man shall be deliv into the hand of men.

9:45 but they understood not thi saying, and it wa hid from them,
that they perceiv it not: and they fear to ask him of that saying.

9:46 then there aros a reason among them, which of them should be
greatest.

9:47 and jesus, perceiv the thought of their heart, took a child,
and set him by him, 9:48 and said unto them, whosoev shall receive
thi child in my name receiveth me: and whosoev shall receiv me
receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the
sam shall be great.

9:49 and john answer and said, master, we saw one cast out devils
in thi name; and we forbad him, becaus he followeth not with us.

9:50 and jesu said unto him, forbid him not: for he that is not
against us is for us.

9:51 and it came to pass, when the time wa come that he should be
receiv up, he stedfastli set hi face to go to jerusalem, 9:52 and
sent messeng befor hi face: and they went, and enter into a
villag of the samaritans, to make readi for him.

9:53 and they did not receiv him, becaus hi face wa as though he
would go to jerusalem.

9:54 and when hi discipl jame and john saw this, they said, lord,
wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as elia did?  9:55 but he turned, and rebuk them, and
said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.

9:56 for the son of man is not come to destroy men' lives, but to
sav them. and they went to anoth village.

9:57 and it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain man
said unto him, lord, I will follow thee whithersoev thou goest.

9:58 and jesu said unto him, fox have holes, and bird of the air
hav nests; but the son of man hath not where to lay hi head.

9:59 and he said unto another, follow me. but he said, lord, suffer me
first to go and buri my father.

9:60 jesu said unto him, let the dead buri their dead: but go thou
and preach the kingdom of god.

9:61 and anoth also said, lord, I will follow thee; but let me first
go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house.

9:62 and jesu said unto him, No man, have put hi hand to the
plough, and look back, is fit for the kingdom of god.

10:1 after these thing the lord appoint other seventi also, and
sent them two and two befor hi face into everi citi and place,
whith he himself would come.

10:2 therefor said he unto them, the harvest truli is great, but the
labour are few: pray ye therefor the lord of the harvest, that he
would send forth labour into hi harvest.

10:3 Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lamb among wolves.

10:4 carri neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salut no man by
th way.

10:5 and into whatsoev hous ye enter, first say, peac be to this
house.

10:6 and if the son of peac be there, your peac shall rest upon it:
if not, it shall turn to you again.

10:7 and in the same hous remain, eat and drink such thing as
they give: for the labour is worthi of hi hire. Go not from house
to house.

10:8 and into whatsoev citi ye enter, and they receiv you, eat such
th as are set befor you: 10:9 and heal the sick that are therein,
and say unto them, the kingdom of god is come nigh unto you.

10:10 but into whatsoev citi ye enter, and they receiv you not, go
your way out into the street of the same, and say, 10:11 even the
veri dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against
you: notwithstand be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of god is
com nigh unto you.

10:12 but I say unto you, that it shall be more toler in that day
for sodom, than for that city.

10:13 woe unto thee, chorazin! woe unto thee, bethsaida! for if the
mighti work had been done in tyre and sidon, which have been done in
you, they had a great while ago repented, sit in sackcloth and
ashes.

10:14 but it shall be more toler for tyre and sidon at the
judgment, than for you.

10:15 and thou, capernaum, which art exalt to heaven, shalt be
thrust down to hell.

10:16 He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you
despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

10:17 and the seventi return again with joy, saying, lord, even the
devil are subject unto us through thi name.

10:18 and he said unto them, I beheld satan as lightn fall from
heaven.

10:19 behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpent and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and noth shall by
ani mean hurt you.

10:20 notwithstand in thi rejoic not, that the spirit are
subject unto you; but rather rejoice, becaus your name are written
in heaven.

10:21 In that hour jesu rejoic in spirit, and said, I thank thee, o
father, lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these thing from
th wise and prudent, and hast reveal them unto babes: even so,
father; for so it seem good in thi sight.

10:22 all thing are deliv to me of my father: and no man knoweth
who the son is, but the father; and who the father is, but the son,
and he to whom the son will reveal him.

10:23 and he turn him unto hi disciples, and said privately,
bless are the eye which see the thing that ye see: 10:24 for i
tel you, that mani prophet and king have desir to see those
th which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them.

10:25 and, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempt him, saying,
master, what shall I do to inherit etern life?  10:26 He said unto
him, what is written in the law? how readest thou?  10:27 and he
answ said, thou shalt love the lord thi god with all thi heart,
and with all thi soul, and with all thi strength, and with all thy
mind; and thi neighbour as thyself.

10:28 and he said unto him, thou hast answer right: thi do, and
thou shalt live.

10:29 but he, will to justifi himself, said unto jesus, and who is
mi neighbour?  10:30 and jesu answer said, A certain man went down
from jerusalem to jericho, and fell among thieves, which strip him
of hi raiment, and wound him, and departed, leav him half dead.

10:31 and by chanc there came down a certain priest that way: and
when he saw him, he pass by on the other side.

10:32 and likewis a levite, when he wa at the place, came and looked
on him, and pass by on the other side.

10:33 but a certain samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and
when he saw him, he had compass on him, 10:34 and went to him, and
bound up hi wounds, pour in oil and wine, and set him on hi own
beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.

10:35 and on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and
gav them to the host, and said unto him, take care of him; and
whatsoev thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.

10:36 which now of these three, thinkest thou, wa neighbour unto him
that fell among the thieves?  10:37 and he said, He that shew mercy
on him. then said jesu unto him, go, and do thou likewise.

10:38 now it came to pass, as they went, that he enter into a
certain village: and a certain woman name martha receiv him into
h house.

10:39 and she had a sister call mary, which also sat at jesus' feet,
and heard hi word.

10:40 but martha wa cumber about much serving, and came to him, and
said, lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve
alone?  bid her therefor that she help me.

10:41 and jesu answer and said unto her, martha, martha, thou art
car and troubl about mani things: 10:42 but one thing is
needful: and mari hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken
away from her.

11:1 and it came to pass, that, as he wa pray in a certain place,
when he ceased, one of hi discipl said unto him, lord, teach us to
pray, as john also taught hi disciples.

11:2 and he said unto them, when ye pray, say, our father which art in
heaven, hallow be thi name. thi kingdom come. thi will be done, as
in heaven, so in earth.

11:3 give us day by day our daili bread.

11:4 and forgiv us our sins; for we also forgiv everi one that is
indebt to us. and lead us not into temptation; but deliv us from
evil.

11:5 and he said unto them, which of you shall have a friend, and
shal go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, friend, lend me three
loaves; 11:6 for a friend of mine in hi journey is come to me, and i
hav noth to set befor him?  11:7 and he from within shall answer
and say, troubl me not: the door is now shut, and my children are
with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.

11:8 I say unto you, though he will not rise and give him, becaus he
i hi friend, yet becaus of hi importun he will rise and give
him as mani as he needeth.

11:9 and I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shal find; knock, and it shall be open unto you.

11:10 for everi one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh
findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

11:11 If a son shall ask bread of ani of you that is a father, will he
giv him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a
serpent?  11:12 Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a
scorpion?  11:13 If ye then, be evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children: how much more shall your heavenli father give the
holi spirit to them that ask him?  11:14 and he wa cast out a
devil, and it wa dumb. and it came to pass, when the devil wa gone
out, the dumb spake; and the peopl wondered.

11:15 but some of them said, He casteth out devil through beelzebub
th chief of the devils.

11:16 and others, tempt him, sought of him a sign from heaven.

11:17 but he, know their thoughts, said unto them, everi kingdom
divid against itself is brought to desolation; and a hous divided
against a hous falleth.

11:18 If satan also be divid against himself, how shall hi kingdom
stand? becaus ye say that I cast out devil through beelzebub.

11:19 and if I by beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your son cast
them out? therefor shall they be your judges.

11:20 but if I with the finger of god cast out devils, no doubt the
kingdom of god is come upon you.

11:21 when a strong man arm keepeth hi palace, hi good are in
peace: 11:22 but when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and
overcom him, he taketh from him all hi armour wherein he trusted,
and divideth hi spoils.

11:23 He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth.

11:24 when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
dri places, seek rest; and find none, he saith, I will return
unto my hous whenc I came out.

11:25 and when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished.

11:26 then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirit more wicked
than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state
of that man is wors than the first.

11:27 and it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman
of the compani lift up her voice, and said unto him, bless is the
womb that bare thee, and the pap which thou hast sucked.

11:28 but he said, yea rather, bless are they that hear the word of
god, and keep it.

11:29 and when the peopl were gather thick together, he began to
say, thi is an evil generation: they seek a sign; and there shall no
sign be given it, but the sign of jona the prophet.

11:30 for as jona wa a sign unto the ninevites, so shall also the
son of man be to thi generation.

11:31 the queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the
men of thi generation, and condemn them: for she came from the utmost
part of the earth to hear the wisdom of solomon; and, behold, a
great than solomon is here.

11:32 the men of ninev shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for they repent at the preaching
of jonas; and, behold, a greater than jona is here.

11:33 No man, when he hath light a candle, putteth it in a secret
place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which
com in may see the light.

11:34 the light of the bodi is the eye: therefor when thine eye is
single, thi whole bodi also is full of light; but when thine eye is
evil, thi bodi also is full of darkness.

11:35 take heed therefor that the light which is in thee be not
darkness.

11:36 If thi whole bodi therefor be full of light, have no part
dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shine of
a candl doth give thee light.

11:37 and as he spake, a certain pharise besought him to dine with
him: and he went in, and sat down to meat.

11:38 and when the pharise saw it, he marvel that he had not first
wash befor dinner.

11:39 and the lord said unto him, now do ye pharise make clean the
outsid of the cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of
raven and wickedness.

11:40 Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that
which is within also?  11:41 but rather give alm of such thing as ye
have; and, behold, all thing are clean unto you.

11:42 but woe unto you, pharisees! for ye tith mint and rue and all
mann of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of god: these
ought ye to have done, and not to leav the other undone.

11:43 woe unto you, pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seat in the
synagogues, and greet in the markets.

11:44 woe unto you, scribe and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as
grav which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware
of them.

11:45 then answer one of the lawyers, and said unto him, master,
thu say thou reproachest us also.

11:46 and he said, woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with
burden grievou to be borne, and ye yourselv touch not the burdens
with one of your fingers.

11:47 woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchr of the prophets, and
your father kill them.

11:48 truli ye bear wit that ye allow the deed of your fathers:
for they inde kill them, and ye build their sepulchres.

11:49 therefor also said the wisdom of god, I will send them prophets
and apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: 11:50
that the blood of all the prophets, which wa shed from the foundation
of the world, may be requir of thi generation; 11:51 from the blood
of abel unto the blood of zacharia which perish between the altar
and the temple: verili I say unto you, It shall be requir of this
generation.

11:52 woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of
knowledge: ye enter not in yourselves, and them that were entering
in ye hindered.

11:53 and as he said these thing unto them, the scribe and the
pharise began to urg him vehemently, and to provok him to speak of
mani things: 11:54 lay wait for him, and seek to catch something
out of hi mouth, that they might accus him.

12:1 In the mean time, when there were gather togeth an
innumer multitud of people, insomuch that they trode one upon
another, he began to say unto hi discipl first of all, bewar ye of
th leaven of the pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

12:2 for there is noth covered, that shall not be revealed; neither
hid, that shall not be known.

12:3 therefor whatsoev ye have spoken in dark shall be heard in
th light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closet shall
b proclaim upon the housetops.

12:4 and I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill
th body, and after that have no more that they can do.

12:5 but I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: fear him, which after
h hath kill hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear
him.

12:6 are not five sparrow sold for two farthings, and not one of them
i forgotten befor god?  12:7 but even the veri hair of your head
ar all numbered. fear not therefore: ye are of more valu than many
sparrows.

12:8 also I say unto you, whosoev shall confess me befor men, him
shal the son of man also confess befor the angel of god: 12:9 but
h that denieth me befor men shall be deni befor the angel of
god.

12:10 and whosoev shall speak a word against the son of man, it
shal be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the holy
ghost it shall not be forgiven.

12:11 and when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto
magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall
answer, or what ye shall say: 12:12 for the holi ghost shall teach you
in the same hour what ye ought to say.

12:13 and one of the compani said unto him, master, speak to my
brother, that he divid the inherit with me.

12:14 and he said unto him, man, who made me a judg or a divid over
you?  12:15 and he said unto them, take heed, and bewar of
covetousness: for a man' life consisteth not in the abund of the
th which he possesseth.

12:16 and he spake a parabl unto them, saying, the ground of a
certain rich man brought forth plentifully: 12:17 and he thought
within himself, saying, what shall I do, becaus I have no room where
to bestow my fruits?  12:18 and he said, thi will I do: I will pull
down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my
fruit and my goods.

12:19 and I will say to my soul, soul, thou hast much good laid up
for mani years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

12:20 but god said unto him, thou fool, thi night thi soul shall be
requir of thee: then whose shall those thing be, which thou hast
provided?  12:21 So is he that layeth up treasur for himself, and is
not rich toward god.

12:22 and he said unto hi disciples, therefor I say unto you, take
no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for the body,
what ye shall put on.

12:23 the life is more than meat, and the bodi is more than raiment.

12:24 consid the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which
neith have storehous nor barn; and god feedeth them: how much more
ar ye better than the fowls?  12:25 and which of you with taking
thought can add to hi statur one cubit?  12:26 If ye then be not
abl to do that thing which is least, whi take ye thought for the
rest?  12:27 consid the lili how they grow: they toil not, they
spin not; and yet I say unto you, that solomon in all hi glori was
not array like one of these.

12:28 If then god so cloth the grass, which is to day in the field,
and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more will he cloth you,
o ye of littl faith?  12:29 and seek not ye what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubt mind.

12:30 for all these thing do the nation of the world seek after: and
your father knoweth that ye have need of these things.

12:31 but rather seek ye the kingdom of god; and all these things
shal be ad unto you.

12:32 fear not, littl flock; for it is your father' good pleasur to
giv you the kingdom.

12:33 sell that ye have, and give alms; provid yourselv bag which
wax not old, a treasur in the heaven that faileth not, where no
thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.

12:34 for where your treasur is, there will your heart be also.

12:35 let your loin be gird about, and your light burning; 12:36
and ye yourselv like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will
return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may
open unto him immediately.

12:37 bless are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall
find watching: verili I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and
mak them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serv them.

12:38 and if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third
watch, and find them so, bless are those servants.

12:39 and thi know, that if the goodman of the hous had known what
hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have
suff hi hous to be broken through.

12:40 Be ye therefor readi also: for the son of man cometh at an hour
when ye think not.

12:41 then peter said unto him, lord, speakest thou thi parabl unto
us, or even to all?  12:42 and the lord said, who then is that
faith and wise steward, whom hi lord shall make ruler over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?  12:43
bless is that servant, whom hi lord when he cometh shall find so
doing.

12:44 Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all
that he hath.

12:45 but and if that servant say in hi heart, My lord delayeth his
coming; and shall begin to beat the menserv and maidens, and to
eat and drink, and to be drunken; 12:46 the lord of that servant will
com in a day when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is
not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
port with the unbelievers.

12:47 and that servant, which knew hi lord' will, and prepar not
himself, neither did accord to hi will, shall be beaten with many
stripes.

12:48 but he that knew not, and did commit thing worthi of stripes,
shal be beaten with few stripes. for unto whomsoev much is given,
of him shall be much required: and to whom men have commit much, of
him they will ask the more.

12:49 I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be
alreadi kindled?  12:50 but I have a baptism to be baptiz with; and
how am I straiten till it be accomplished!  12:51 suppos ye that i
am come to give peac on earth? I tell you, nay; but rather division:
12:52 for from henceforth there shall be five in one hous divided,
thre against two, and two against three.

12:53 the father shall be divid against the son, and the son against
th father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against
th mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the
daught in law against her mother in law.

12:54 and he said also to the people, when ye see a cloud rise out of
th west, straightway ye say, there cometh a shower; and so it is.

12:55 and when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, there will be heat;
and it cometh to pass.

12:56 Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the
earth; but how is it that ye do not discern thi time?  12:57 yea, and
whi even of yourselv judg ye not what is right?  12:58 when thou
goest with thine adversari to the magistrate, as thou art in the way,
giv dilig that thou mayest be deliv from him; lest he hale
the to the judge, and the judg deliv thee to the officer, and the
offic cast thee into prison.

12:59 I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid
th veri last mite.

13:1 there were present at that season some that told him of the
galilaeans, whose blood pilat had mingl with their sacrifices.

13:2 and jesu answer said unto them, suppos ye that these
galilaean were sinner abov all the galilaeans, becaus they
suff such things?  13:3 I tell you, nay: but, except ye repent, ye
shal all likewis perish.

13:4 Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in siloam fell, and slew
them, think ye that they were sinner abov all men that dwelt in
jerusalem?  13:5 I tell you, nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all
likewis perish.

13:6 He spake also thi parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted
in hi vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.

13:7 then said he unto the dresser of hi vineyard, behold, these
thre year I come seek fruit on thi fig tree, and find none: cut
it down; whi cumbereth it the ground?  13:8 and he answer said unto
him, lord, let it alon thi year also, till I shall dig about it, and
dung it: 13:9 and if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that
thou shalt cut it down.

13:10 and he wa teach in one of the synagogu on the sabbath.

13:11 and, behold, there wa a woman which had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years, and wa bow together, and could in no wise lift up
herself.

13:12 and when jesu saw her, he call her to him, and said unto her,
woman, thou art loos from thine infirmity.

13:13 and he laid hi hand on her: and immedi she wa made
straight, and glorifi god.

13:14 and the ruler of the synagogu answer with indignation,
becaus that jesu had heal on the sabbath day, and said unto the
people, there are six day in which men ought to work: in them
therefor come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day.

13:15 the lord then answer him, and said, thou hypocrite, doth not
each one of you on the sabbath loos hi ox or hi ass from the stall,
and lead him away to watering?  13:16 and ought not thi woman, being
a daughter of abraham, whom satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen
years, be loos from thi bond on the sabbath day?  13:17 and when he
had said these things, all hi adversari were ashamed: and all the
peopl rejoic for all the gloriou thing that were done by him.

13:18 then said he, unto what is the kingdom of god like? and
whereunto shall I resembl it?  13:19 It is like a grain of mustard
seed, which a man took, and cast into hi garden; and it grew, and
wax a great tree; and the fowl of the air lodg in the branch of
it.

13:20 and again he said, whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of god?
13:21 It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures
of meal, till the whole wa leavened.

13:22 and he went through the citi and villages, teaching, and
journey toward jerusalem.

13:23 then said one unto him, lord, are there few that be saved? and
h said unto them, 13:24 strive to enter in at the strait gate: for
many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

13:25 when onc the master of the hous is risen up, and hath shut to
th door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, lord, lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto
you, I know you not whenc ye are: 13:26 then shall ye begin to say,
w have eaten and drunk in thi presence, and thou hast taught in our
streets.

13:27 but he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whenc ye are;
depart from me, all ye worker of iniquity.

13:28 there shall be weep and gnash of teeth, when ye shall see
abraham, and isaac, and jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of
god, and you yourselv thrust out.

13:29 and they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from
th north, and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of
god.

13:30 and, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are
first which shall be last.

13:31 the same day there came certain of the pharisees, say unto
him, get thee out, and depart hence: for herod will kill thee.

13:32 and he said unto them, Go ye, and tell that fox, behold, I cast
out devils, and I do cure to day and to morrow, and the third day i
shal be perfected.

13:33 nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day
following: for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of jerusalem.

13:34 O jerusalem, jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest
them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gather thy
children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and
y would not!  13:35 behold, your hous is left unto you desolate: and
verili I say unto you, Ye shall not see me, until the time come when
y shall say, bless is he that cometh in the name of the lord.

14:1 and it came to pass, as he went into the hous of one of the
chief pharise to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched
him.

14:2 and, behold, there wa a certain man befor him which had the
dropsy.

14:3 and jesu answer spake unto the lawyer and pharisees, saying,
i it law to heal on the sabbath day?  14:4 and they held their
peace. and he took him, and heal him, and let him go; 14:5 and
answ them, saying, which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen
into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?
14:6 and they could not answer him again to these things.

14:7 and he put forth a parabl to those which were bidden, when he
mark how they chose out the chief rooms; say unto them.

14:8 when thou art bidden of ani man to a wedding, sit not down in the
highest room; lest a more honour man than thou be bidden of him;
14:9 and he that bade thee and him come and say to thee, give thi man
place; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room.

14:10 but when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room;
that when he that bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee, friend, go
up higher: then shalt thou have worship in the presenc of them that
sit at meat with thee.

14:11 for whosoev exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted.

14:12 then said he also to him that bade him, when thou makest a
dinn or a supper, call not thi friends, nor thi brethren, neither
thi kinsmen, nor thi rich neighbours; lest they also bid thee again,
and a recomp be made thee.

14:13 but when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, the blind: 14:14 and thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot
recompens thee: for thou shalt be recompens at the resurrect of
th just.

14:15 and when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these
things, he said unto him, bless is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of god.

14:16 then said he unto him, A certain man made a great supper, and
bad many: 14:17 and sent hi servant at supper time to say to them
that were bidden, come; for all thing are now ready.

14:18 and they all with one consent began to make excuse. the first
said unto him, I have bought a piec of ground, and I must need go
and see it: I pray thee have me excused.

14:19 and anoth said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to
prov them: I pray thee have me excused.

14:20 and anoth said, I have marri a wife, and therefor I cannot
come.

14:21 So that servant came, and shew hi lord these things. then the
mast of the hous be angri said to hi servant, Go out quickly
into the street and lane of the city, and bring in hither the poor,
and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.

14:22 and the servant said, lord, it is done as thou hast commanded,
and yet there is room.

14:23 and the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highway and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that my hous may be filled.

14:24 for I say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden
shal tast of my supper.

14:25 and there went great multitud with him: and he turned, and
said unto them, 14:26 If ani man come to me, and hate not hi father,
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea,
and hi own life also, he cannot be my disciple.

14:27 and whosoev doth not bear hi cross, and come after me, cannot
b my disciple.

14:28 for which of you, intend to build a tower, sitteth not down
first, and counteth the cost, whether he have suffici to finish it?
14:29 lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able
to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, 14:30 saying, this
man began to build, and wa not abl to finish.

14:31 Or what king, go to make war against anoth king, sitteth
not down first, and consulteth whether he be abl with ten thousand to
meet him that cometh against him with twenti thousand?  14:32 Or else,
whil the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and
desireth condit of peace.

14:33 So likewise, whosoev he be of you that forsaketh not all that
h hath, he cannot be my disciple.

14:34 salt is good: but if the salt have lost hi savour, wherewith
shal it be seasoned?  14:35 It is neither fit for the land, nor yet
for the dunghill; but men cast it out. He that hath ear to hear, let
him hear.

15:1 then drew near unto him all the publican and sinner for to hear
him.

15:2 and the pharise and scribe murmured, saying, thi man
receiveth sinners, and eateth with them.

15:3 and he spake thi parabl unto them, saying, 15:4 what man of
you, have an hundr sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave
th nineti and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is
lost, until he find it?  15:5 and when he hath found it, he layeth it
on hi shoulders, rejoicing.

15:6 and when he cometh home, he calleth togeth hi friend and
neighbours, say unto them, rejoic with me; for I have found my
sheep which wa lost.

15:7 I say unto you, that likewis joy shall be in heaven over one
sinn that repenteth, more than over nineti and nine just persons,
which need no repentance.

15:8 either what woman have ten piec of silver, if she lose one
piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek
dilig till she find it?  15:9 and when she hath found it, she
calleth her friend and her neighbour together, saying, rejoic with
me; for I have found the piec which I had lost.

15:10 likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presenc of the
angel of god over one sinner that repenteth.

15:11 and he said, A certain man had two sons: 15:12 and the younger
of them said to hi father, father, give me the portion of good that
falleth to me. and he divid unto them hi living.

15:13 and not mani day after the younger son gather all together,
and took hi journey into a far country, and there wast his
subst with riotou living.

15:14 and when he had spent all, there aros a mighti famin in that
land; and he began to be in want.

15:15 and he went and join himself to a citizen of that country; and
h sent him into hi field to feed swine.

15:16 and he would fain have fill hi belli with the husk that the
swin did eat: and no man gave unto him.

15:17 and when he came to himself, he said, how mani hire servant of
mi father' have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!
15:18 I will aris and go to my father, and will say unto him, father,
i have sin against heaven, and befor thee, 15:19 and am no more
worthi to be call thi son: make me as one of thi hire servants.

15:20 and he arose, and came to hi father. but when he wa yet a
great way off, hi father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and
fel on hi neck, and kiss him.

15:21 and the son said unto him, father, I have sin against heaven,
and in thi sight, and am no more worthi to be call thi son.

15:22 but the father said to hi servants, bring forth the best robe,
and put it on him; and put a ring on hi hand, and shoe on hi feet:
15:23 and bring hither the fat calf, and kill it; and let us eat,
and be merry: 15:24 for thi my son wa dead, and is aliv again; he
wa lost, and is found. and they began to be merry.

15:25 now hi elder son wa in the field: and as he came and drew nigh
to the house, he heard musick and dancing.

15:26 and he call one of the servants, and ask what these things
meant.

15:27 and he said unto him, thi brother is come; and thi father hath
kil the fat calf, becaus he hath receiv him safe and sound.

15:28 and he wa angry, and would not go in: therefor came hi father
out, and intreat him.

15:29 and he answer said to hi father, lo, these mani year do i
serv thee, neither transgress I at ani time thi commandment: and
yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merri with my
friends: 15:30 but as soon as thi thi son wa come, which hath
devour thi live with harlots, thou hast kill for him the fatted
calf.

15:31 and he said unto him, son, thou art ever with me, and all that i
hav is thine.

15:32 It wa meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for thi thy
broth wa dead, and is aliv again; and wa lost, and is found.

16:1 and he said also unto hi disciples, there wa a certain rich
man, which had a steward; and the same wa accus unto him that he
had wast hi goods.

16:2 and he call him, and said unto him, how is it that I hear this
of thee? give an account of thi stewardship; for thou mayest be no
long steward.

16:3 then the steward said within himself, what shall I do? for my
lord taketh away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg I am
ashamed.

16:4 I am resolv what to do, that, when I am put out of the
stewardship, they may receiv me into their houses.

16:5 So he call everi one of hi lord' debtor unto him, and said
unto the first, how much owest thou unto my lord?  16:6 and he said,
an hundr measur of oil. and he said unto him, take thi bill, and
sit down quickly, and write fifty.

16:7 then said he to another, and how much owest thou? and he said, an
hundr measur of wheat. and he said unto him, take thi bill, and
writ fourscore.

16:8 and the lord commend the unjust steward, becaus he had done
wisely: for the children of thi world are in their gener wiser
than the children of light.

16:9 and I say unto you, make to yourselv friend of the mammon of
unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receiv you into
everlast habitations.

16:10 He that is faith in that which is least is faith also in
much: and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much.

16:11 If therefor ye have not been faith in the unrighteous
mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?  16:12 and if
y have not been faith in that which is anoth man's, who shall
giv you that which is your own?  16:13 No servant can serv two
masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else
h will hold to the one, and despis the other. Ye cannot serv god
and mammon.

16:14 and the pharise also, who were covetous, heard all these
things: and they derid him.

16:15 and he said unto them, Ye are they which justifi yourselves
befor men; but god knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly
esteem among men is abomin in the sight of god.

16:16 the law and the prophet were until john: sinc that time the
kingdom of god is preached, and everi man presseth into it.

16:17 and it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle
of the law to fail.

16:18 whosoev putteth away hi wife, and marrieth another,
committeth adultery: and whosoev marrieth her that is put away from
her husband committeth adultery.

16:19 there wa a certain rich man, which wa cloth in purpl and
fin linen, and fare sumptuous everi day: 16:20 and there wa a
certain beggar name lazarus, which wa laid at hi gate, full of
sores, 16:21 and desir to be fed with the crumb which fell from
th rich man' table: moreov the dog came and lick hi sores.

16:22 and it came to pass, that the beggar died, and wa carri by
th angel into abraham' bosom: the rich man also died, and was
buried; 16:23 and in hell he lift up hi eyes, be in torments, and
seeth abraham afar off, and lazaru in hi bosom.

16:24 and he cri and said, father abraham, have merci on me, and
send lazarus, that he may dip the tip of hi finger in water, and cool
mi tongue; for I am torment in thi flame.

16:25 but abraham said, son, rememb that thou in thi lifetime
receivedst thi good things, and likewis lazaru evil things: but now
h is comforted, and thou art tormented.

16:26 and besid all this, between us and you there is a great gulf
fixed: so that they which would pass from henc to you cannot; neither
can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

16:27 then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest
send him to my father' house: 16:28 for I have five brethren; that he
may testifi unto them, lest they also come into thi place of torment.

16:29 abraham saith unto him, they have mose and the prophets; let
them hear them.

16:30 and he said, nay, father abraham: but if one went unto them from
th dead, they will repent.

16:31 and he said unto him, If they hear not mose and the prophets,
neith will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

17:1 then said he unto the disciples, It is imposs but that
off will come: but woe unto him, through whom they come!  17:2 it
wer better for him that a millston were hang about hi neck, and
h cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little
ones.

17:3 take heed to yourselves: If thi brother trespass against thee,
rebuk him; and if he repent, forgiv him.

17:4 and if he trespass against thee seven time in a day, and seven
tim in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt
forg him.

17:5 and the apostl said unto the lord, increas our faith.

17:6 and the lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye
might say unto thi sycamin tree, Be thou pluck up by the root, and
b thou plant in the sea; and it should obey you.

17:7 but which of you, have a servant plow or feed cattle,
wil say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and
sit down to meat?  17:8 and will not rather say unto him, make ready
wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serv me, till I have eaten
and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?  17:9 doth he
thank that servant becaus he did the thing that were command him?
i trow not.

17:10 So likewis ye, when ye shall have done all those thing which
ar command you, say, We are unprofit servants: we have done
that which wa our duti to do.

17:11 and it came to pass, as he went to jerusalem, that he passed
through the midst of samaria and galilee.

17:12 and as he enter into a certain village, there met him ten men
that were lepers, which stood afar off: 17:13 and they lift up their
voices, and said, jesus, master, have merci on us.

17:14 and when he saw them, he said unto them, Go shew yourselv unto
th priests. and it came to pass, that, as they went, they were
cleansed.

17:15 and one of them, when he saw that he wa healed, turn back,
and with a loud voic glorifi god, 17:16 and fell down on hi face
at hi feet, give him thanks: and he wa a samaritan.

17:17 and jesu answer said, were there not ten cleansed? but where
ar the nine?  17:18 there are not found that return to give glory
to god, save thi stranger.

17:19 and he said unto him, arise, go thi way: thi faith hath made
the whole.

17:20 and when he wa demand of the pharisees, when the kingdom of
god should come, he answer them and said, the kingdom of god cometh
not with observation: 17:21 neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo
there! for, behold, the kingdom of god is within you.

17:22 and he said unto the disciples, the day will come, when ye
shal desir to see one of the day of the son of man, and ye shall
not see it.

17:23 and they shall say to you, see here; or, see there: go not after
them, nor follow them.

17:24 for as the lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under
heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shall also the
son of man be in hi day.

17:25 but first must he suffer mani things, and be reject of this
generation.

17:26 and as it wa in the day of noe, so shall it be also in the
day of the son of man.

17:27 they did eat, they drank, they marri wives, they were given in
marriage, until the day that noe enter into the ark, and the flood
came, and destroy them all.

17:28 likewis also as it wa in the day of lot; they did eat, they
drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; 17:29 but
th same day that lot went out of sodom it rain fire and brimstone
from heaven, and destroy them all.

17:30 even thu shall it be in the day when the son of man is
revealed.

17:31 In that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and hi stuff
in the house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in
th field, let him likewis not return back.

17:32 rememb lot' wife.

17:33 whosoev shall seek to save hi life shall lose it; and
whosoev shall lose hi life shall preserv it.

17:34 I tell you, in that night there shall be two men in one bed; the
on shall be taken, and the other shall be left.

17:35 two women shall be grind together; the one shall be taken,
and the other left.

17:36 two men shall be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the
oth left.

17:37 and they answer and said unto him, where, lord? and he said
unto them, wheresoev the bodi is, thither will the eagl be
gath together.

18:1 and he spake a parabl unto them to thi end, that men ought
alway to pray, and not to faint; 18:2 saying, there wa in a citi a
judge, which fear not god, neither regard man: 18:3 and there was
a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, aveng me of mine
adversary.

18:4 and he would not for a while: but afterward he said within
himself, though I fear not god, nor regard man; 18:5 yet becaus this
widow troubleth me, I will aveng her, lest by her continu coming
sh weari me.

18:6 and the lord said, hear what the unjust judg saith.

18:7 and shall not god aveng hi own elect, which cri day and night
unto him, though he bear long with them?  18:8 I tell you that he will
aveng them speedily. nevertheless when the son of man cometh, shall
h find faith on the earth?  18:9 and he spake thi parabl unto
certain which trust in themselv that they were righteous, and
despis others: 18:10 two men went up into the templ to pray; the
on a pharisee, and the other a publican.

18:11 the pharise stood and pray thu with himself, god, I thank
thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as thi publican.

18:12 I fast twice in the week, I give tith of all that I possess.

18:13 and the publican, stand afar off, would not lift up so much
a hi eye unto heaven, but smote upon hi breast, saying, god be
merci to me a sinner.

18:14 I tell you, thi man went down to hi hous justifi rather
than the other: for everi one that exalteth himself shall be abased;
and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

18:15 and they brought unto him also infants, that he would touch
them: but when hi discipl saw it, they rebuk them.

18:16 but jesu call them unto him, and said, suffer littl children
to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of
god.

18:17 verili I say unto you, whosoev shall not receiv the kingdom
of god as a littl child shall in no wise enter therein.

18:18 and a certain ruler ask him, saying, good master, what shall i
do to inherit etern life?  18:19 and jesu said unto him, why
callest thou me good? none is good, save one, that is, god.

18:20 thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not
kill, Do not steal, Do not bear fals witness, honour thi father and
thi mother.

18:21 and he said, all these have I kept from my youth up.

18:22 now when jesu heard these things, he said unto him, yet lackest
th one thing: sell all that thou hast, and distribut unto the poor,
and thou shalt have treasur in heaven: and come, follow me.

18:23 and when he heard this, he wa veri sorrowful: for he wa very
rich.

18:24 and when jesu saw that he wa veri sorrowful, he said, how
hardli shall they that have rich enter into the kingdom of god!
18:25 for it is easier for a camel to go through a needle' eye, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of god.

18:26 and they that heard it said, who then can be saved?  18:27 and
h said, the thing which are imposs with men are possibl with
god.

18:28 then peter said, lo, we have left all, and follow thee.

18:29 and he said unto them, verili I say unto you, there is no man
that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children,
for the kingdom of god' sake, 18:30 who shall not receiv manifold
mor in thi present time, and in the world to come life everlasting.

18:31 then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, behold, we
go up to jerusalem, and all thing that are written by the prophets
concern the son of man shall be accomplished.

18:32 for he shall be deliv unto the gentiles, and shall be
mocked, and spite entreated, and spit on: 18:33 and they shall
scourg him, and put him to death: and the third day he shall rise
again.

18:34 and they understood none of these things: and thi say was
hid from them, neither knew they the thing which were spoken.

18:35 and it came to pass, that as he wa come nigh unto jericho, a
certain blind man sat by the way side begging: 18:36 and hear the
multitud pass by, he ask what it meant.

18:37 and they told him, that jesu of nazareth passeth by.

18:38 and he cried, saying, jesus, thou son of david, have merci on
me.

18:39 and they which went befor rebuk him, that he should hold his
peace: but he cri so much the more, thou son of david, have merci on
me.

18:40 and jesu stood, and command him to be brought unto him: and
when he wa come near, he ask him, 18:41 saying, what wilt thou that
i shall do unto thee? and he said, lord, that I may receiv my sight.

18:42 and jesu said unto him, receiv thi sight: thi faith hath saved
thee.

18:43 and immedi he receiv hi sight, and follow him,
glorifi god: and all the people, when they saw it, gave prais unto
god.

19:1 and jesu enter and pass through jericho.

19:2 and, behold, there wa a man name zacchaeus, which wa the chief
among the publicans, and he wa rich.

19:3 and he sought to see jesu who he was; and could not for the
press, becaus he wa littl of stature.

19:4 and he ran before, and climb up into a sycomor tree to see
him: for he wa to pass that way.

19:5 and when jesu came to the place, he look up, and saw him, and
said unto him, zacchaeus, make haste, and come down; for to day I must
abid at thi house.

19:6 and he made haste, and came down, and receiv him joyfully.

19:7 and when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, that he wa gone
to be guest with a man that is a sinner.

19:8 and zacchaeu stood, and said unto the lord: behold, lord, the
half of my good I give to the poor; and if I have taken ani thing
from ani man by fals accusation, I restor him fourfold.

19:9 and jesu said unto him, thi day is salvat come to this
house, forsomuch as he also is a son of abraham.

19:10 for the son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost.

19:11 and as they heard these things, he ad and spake a parable,
becaus he wa nigh to jerusalem, and becaus they thought that the
kingdom of god should immedi appear.

19:12 He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far countri to
rec for himself a kingdom, and to return.

19:13 and he call hi ten servants, and deliv them ten pounds,
and said unto them, occupi till I come.

19:14 but hi citizen hate him, and sent a messag after him,
saying, We will not have thi man to reign over us.

19:15 and it came to pass, that when he wa returned, have received
th kingdom, then he command these servant to be call unto him,
to whom he had given the money, that he might know how much everi man
had gain by trading.

19:16 then came the first, saying, lord, thi pound hath gain ten
pounds.

19:17 and he said unto him, well, thou good servant: becaus thou hast
been faith in a veri little, have thou author over ten cities.

19:18 and the second came, saying, lord, thi pound hath gain five
pounds.

19:19 and he said likewis to him, Be thou also over five cities.

19:20 and anoth came, saying, lord, behold, here is thi pound, which
i have kept laid up in a napkin: 19:21 for I fear thee, becaus thou
art an auster man: thou takest up that thou layedst not down, and
reapest that thou didst not sow.

19:22 and he saith unto him, out of thine own mouth will I judg thee,
thou wick servant. thou knewest that I wa an auster man, take up
that I laid not down, and reap that I did not sow: 19:23 wherefore
then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my come I might
hav requir mine own with usury?  19:24 and he said unto them that
stood by, take from him the pound, and give it to him that hath ten
pounds.

19:25 (and they said unto him, lord, he hath ten pounds.)  19:26 for i
say unto you, that unto everi one which hath shall be given; and from
him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him.

19:27 but those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and slay them befor me.

19:28 and when he had thu spoken, he went before, ascend up to
jerusalem.

19:29 and it came to pass, when he wa come nigh to bethphag and
bethany, at the mount call the mount of olives, he sent two of his
disciples, 19:30 saying, Go ye into the villag over against you; in
th which at your enter ye shall find a colt tied, whereon yet
nev man sat: loos him, and bring him hither.

19:31 and if ani man ask you, whi do ye loos him? thu shall ye say
unto him, becaus the lord hath need of him.

19:32 and they that were sent went their way, and found even as he had
said unto them.

19:33 and as they were loos the colt, the owner thereof said unto
them, whi loos ye the colt?  19:34 and they said, the lord hath need
of him.

19:35 and they brought him to jesus: and they cast their garment upon
th colt, and they set jesu thereon.

19:36 and as he went, they spread their cloth in the way.

19:37 and when he wa come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount
of olives, the whole multitud of the discipl began to rejoic and
prais god with a loud voic for all the mighti work that they had
seen; 19:38 saying, bless be the king that cometh in the name of the
lord: peac in heaven, and glori in the highest.

19:39 and some of the pharise from among the multitud said unto
him, master, rebuk thi disciples.

19:40 and he answer and said unto them, I tell you that, if these
should hold their peace, the stone would immedi cri out.

19:41 and when he wa come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it,
19:42 saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in thi thy
day, the thing which belong unto thi peace! but now they are hid from
thin eyes.

19:43 for the day shall come upon thee, that thine enemi shall cast
a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side, 19:44 and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thi children
within thee; and they shall not leav in thee one stone upon another;
becaus thou knewest not the time of thi visitation.

19:45 and he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that
sold therein, and them that bought; 19:46 say unto them, It is
written, My hous is the hous of prayer: but ye have made it a den of
thieves.

19:47 and he taught daili in the temple. but the chief priest and the
scrib and the chief of the peopl sought to destroy him, 19:48 and
could not find what they might do: for all the peopl were very
attent to hear him.

20:1 and it came to pass, that on one of those days, as he taught the
peopl in the temple, and preach the gospel, the chief priest and
th scribe came upon him with the elders, 20:2 and spake unto him,
saying, tell us, by what author doest thou these things? or who is
h that gave thee thi authority?  20:3 and he answer and said unto
them, I will also ask you one thing; and answer me: 20:4 the baptism
of john, wa it from heaven, or of men?  20:5 and they reason with
themselves, saying, If we shall say, from heaven; he will say, why
then believ ye him not?  20:6 but and if we say, Of men; all the
peopl will stone us: for they be persuad that john wa a prophet.

20:7 and they answered, that they could not tell whenc it was.

20:8 and jesu said unto them, neither tell I you by what author i
do these things.

20:9 then began he to speak to the peopl thi parable; A certain man
plant a vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen, and went into a
far countri for a long time.

20:10 and at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they
should give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat
him, and sent him away empty.

20:11 and again he sent anoth servant: and they beat him also, and
entr him shamefully, and sent him away empty.

20:12 and again he sent a third: and they wound him also, and cast
him out.

20:13 then said the lord of the vineyard, what shall I do? I will send
mi belov son: it may be they will rever him when they see him.

20:14 but when the husbandmen saw him, they reason among themselves,
saying, thi is the heir: come, let us kill him, that the inheritance
may be ours.

20:15 So they cast him out of the vineyard, and kill him. what
therefor shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them?  20:16 He shall
com and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to
others. and when they heard it, they said, god forbid.

20:17 and he beheld them, and said, what is thi then that is written,
th stone which the builder rejected, the same is becom the head of
th corner?  20:18 whosoev shall fall upon that stone shall be
broken; but on whomsoev it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

20:19 and the chief priest and the scribe the same hour sought to
lay hand on him; and they fear the people: for they perceiv that
h had spoken thi parabl against them.

20:20 and they watch him, and sent forth spies, which should feign
themselv just men, that they might take hold of hi words, that so
they might deliv him unto the power and author of the governor.

20:21 and they ask him, saying, master, we know that thou sayest and
teachest rightly, neither acceptest thou the person of any, but
teachest the way of god truly: 20:22 Is it law for us to give
tribut unto caesar, or no?  20:23 but he perceiv their craftiness,
and said unto them, whi tempt ye me?  20:24 shew me a penny. whose
imag and superscript hath it? they answer and said, caesar's.

20:25 and he said unto them, render therefor unto caesar the things
which be caesar's, and unto god the thing which be god's.

20:26 and they could not take hold of hi word befor the people: and
they marvel at hi answer, and held their peace.

20:27 then came to him certain of the sadducees, which deni that there
i ani resurrection; and they ask him, 20:28 saying, master, moses
wrot unto us, If ani man' brother die, have a wife, and he die
without children, that hi brother should take hi wife, and rais up
se unto hi brother.

20:29 there were therefor seven brethren: and the first took a wife,
and die without children.

20:30 and the second took her to wife, and he die childless.

20:31 and the third took her; and in like manner the seven also: and
they left no children, and died.

20:32 last of all the woman die also.

20:33 therefor in the resurrect whose wife of them is she? for
seven had her to wife.

20:34 and jesu answer said unto them, the children of thi world
marry, and are given in marriage: 20:35 but they which shall be
account worthi to obtain that world, and the resurrect from the
dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: 20:36 neither can they
di ani more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children
of god, be the children of the resurrection.

20:37 now that the dead are raised, even mose shew at the bush,
when he calleth the lord the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and
th god of jacob.

20:38 for he is not a god of the dead, but of the living: for all live
unto him.

20:39 then certain of the scribe answer said, master, thou hast
wel said.

20:40 and after that they durst not ask him ani question at all.

20:41 and he said unto them, how say they that christ is david' son?
20:42 and david himself saith in the book of psalms, the lord said
unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand, 20:43 till I make thine
enemi thi footstool.

20:44 david therefor calleth him lord, how is he then hi son?  20:45
then in the audienc of all the peopl he said unto hi disciples,
20:46 bewar of the scribes, which desir to walk in long robes, and
lov greet in the markets, and the highest seat in the
synagogues, and the chief room at feasts; 20:47 which devour widows'
houses, and for a shew make long prayers: the same shall receive
great damnation.

21:1 and he look up, and saw the rich men cast their gift into
th treasury.

21:2 and he saw also a certain poor widow cast in thither two
mites.

21:3 and he said, Of a truth I say unto you, that thi poor widow hath
cast in more than they all: 21:4 for all these have of their abundance
cast in unto the offer of god: but she of her penuri hath cast in
al the live that she had.

21:5 and as some spake of the temple, how it wa adorn with goodly
ston and gifts, he said, 21:6 As for these thing which ye behold,
th day will come, in the which there shall not be left one stone
upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

21:7 and they ask him, saying, master, but when shall these things
be?  and what sign will there be when these thing shall come to pass?
21:8 and he said, take heed that ye be not deceived: for mani shall
com in my name, saying, I am christ; and the time draweth near: go ye
not therefor after them.

21:9 but when ye shall hear of war and commotions, be not terrified:
for these thing must first come to pass; but the end is not by and
by.

21:10 then said he unto them, nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom: 21:11 and great earthquak shall be in
div places, and famines, and pestilences; and fear sight and
great sign shall there be from heaven.

21:12 but befor all these, they shall lay their hand on you, and
persecut you, deliv you up to the synagogues, and into prisons,
b brought befor king and ruler for my name' sake.

21:13 and it shall turn to you for a testimony.

21:14 settl it therefor in your hearts, not to medit befor what
y shall answer: 21:15 for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which
al your adversari shall not be abl to gainsay nor resist.

21:16 and ye shall be betray both by parents, and brethren, and
kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they caus to be put to
death.

21:17 and ye shall be hate of all men for my name' sake.

21:18 but there shall not an hair of your head perish.

21:19 In your patienc possess ye your souls.

21:20 and when ye shall see jerusalem compass with armies, then know
that the desol thereof is nigh.

21:21 then let them which are in judaea flee to the mountains; and let
them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let not them that
ar in the countri enter thereinto.

21:22 for these be the day of vengeance, that all thing which are
written may be fulfilled.

21:23 but woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give
suck, in those days! for there shall be great distress in the land,
and wrath upon thi people.

21:24 and they shall fall by the edg of the sword, and shall be led
away captiv into all nations: and jerusalem shall be trodden down of
th gentiles, until the time of the gentil be fulfilled.

21:25 and there shall be sign in the sun, and in the moon, and in the
stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the
sea and the wave roaring; 21:26 men' heart fail them for fear,
and for look after those thing which are come on the earth: for
th power of heaven shall be shaken.

21:27 and then shall they see the son of man come in a cloud with
pow and great glory.

21:28 and when these thing begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads; for your redempt draweth nigh.

21:29 and he spake to them a parable; behold the fig tree, and all the
trees; 21:30 when they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own
selv that summer is now nigh at hand.

21:31 So likewis ye, when ye see these thing come to pass, know ye
that the kingdom of god is nigh at hand.

21:32 verili I say unto you, thi gener shall not pass away, till
al be fulfilled.

21:33 heaven and earth shall pass away: but my word shall not pass
away.

21:34 and take heed to yourselves, lest at ani time your heart be
overcharg with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and care of thi life,
and so that day come upon you unawares.

21:35 for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face
of the whole earth.

21:36 watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted
worthi to escap all these thing that shall come to pass, and to
stand befor the son of man.

21:37 and in the day time he wa teach in the temple; and at night
h went out, and abod in the mount that is call the mount of
olives.

21:38 and all the peopl came earli in the morn to him in the
temple, for to hear him.

22:1 now the feast of unleaven bread drew nigh, which is call the
passover.

22:2 and the chief priest and scribe sought how they might kill him;
for they fear the people.

22:3 then enter satan into juda surnam iscariot, be of the
numb of the twelve.

22:4 and he went hi way, and commun with the chief priest and
captains, how he might betray him unto them.

22:5 and they were glad, and coven to give him money.

22:6 and he promised, and sought opportun to betray him unto them
in the absenc of the multitude.

22:7 then came the day of unleaven bread, when the passov must be
killed.

22:8 and he sent peter and john, saying, Go and prepar us the
passover, that we may eat.

22:9 and they said unto him, where wilt thou that we prepare?  22:10
and he said unto them, behold, when ye are enter into the city,
ther shall a man meet you, bear a pitcher of water; follow him
into the hous where he entereth in.

22:11 and ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, the master saith
unto thee, where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover
with my disciples?  22:12 and he shall shew you a larg upper room
furnished: there make ready.

22:13 and they went, and found as he had said unto them: and they made
readi the passover.

22:14 and when the hour wa come, he sat down, and the twelv apostles
with him.

22:15 and he said unto them, with desir I have desir to eat this
passov with you befor I suffer: 22:16 for I say unto you, I will
not ani more eat thereof, until it be fulfil in the kingdom of god.

22:17 and he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, take this, and
divid it among yourselves: 22:18 for I say unto you, I will not drink
of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of god shall come.

22:19 and he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
them, saying, thi is my bodi which is given for you: thi do in
remembr of me.

22:20 likewis also the cup after supper, saying, thi cup is the new
testa in my blood, which is shed for you.

22:21 but, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the
table.

22:22 and truli the son of man goeth, as it wa determined: but woe
unto that man by whom he is betrayed!  22:23 and they began to enquire
among themselves, which of them it wa that should do thi thing.

22:24 and there wa also a strife among them, which of them should be
account the greatest.

22:25 and he said unto them, the king of the gentil exercise
lordship over them; and they that exercis author upon them are
cal benefactors.

22:26 but ye shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you, let
him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve.

22:27 for whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that
serveth?  is not he that sitteth at meat? but I am among you as he
that serveth.

22:28 Ye are they which have continu with me in my temptations.

22:29 and I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father hath appointed
unto me; 22:30 that ye may eat and drink at my tabl in my kingdom,
and sit on throne judg the twelv tribe of israel.

22:31 and the lord said, simon, simon, behold, satan hath desir to
hav you, that he may sift you as wheat: 22:32 but I have pray for
thee, that thi faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen
thi brethren.

22:33 and he said unto him, lord, I am readi to go with thee, both
into prison, and to death.

22:34 and he said, I tell thee, peter, the cock shall not crow this
day, befor that thou shalt thrice deni that thou knowest me.

22:35 and he said unto them, when I sent you without purse, and scrip,
and shoes, lack ye ani thing? and they said, nothing.

22:36 then said he unto them, but now, he that hath a purse, let him
tak it, and likewis hi scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him
sel hi garment, and buy one.

22:37 for I say unto you, that thi that is written must yet be
accomplish in me, and he wa reckon among the transgressors: for
th thing concern me have an end.

22:38 and they said, lord, behold, here are two swords. and he said
unto them, It is enough.

22:39 and he came out, and went, as he wa wont, to the mount of
olives; and hi discipl also follow him.

22:40 and when he wa at the place, he said unto them, pray that ye
ent not into temptation.

22:41 and he wa withdrawn from them about a stone' cast, and kneeled
down, and prayed, 22:42 saying, father, if thou be willing, remove
thi cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

22:43 and there appear an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening
him.

22:44 and be in an agoni he pray more earnestly: and hi sweat
wa as it were great drop of blood fall down to the ground.

22:45 and when he rose up from prayer, and wa come to hi disciples,
h found them sleep for sorrow, 22:46 and said unto them, whi sleep
ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.

22:47 and while he yet spake, behold a multitude, and he that was
cal judas, one of the twelve, went befor them, and drew near unto
jesu to kiss him.

22:48 but jesu said unto him, judas, betrayest thou the son of man
with a kiss?  22:49 when they which were about him saw what would
follow, they said unto him, lord, shall we smite with the sword?
22:50 and one of them smote the servant of the high priest, and cut
off hi right ear.

22:51 and jesu answer and said, suffer ye thu far. and he touched
hi ear, and heal him.

22:52 then jesu said unto the chief priests, and captain of the
temple, and the elders, which were come to him, Be ye come out, as
against a thief, with sword and staves?  22:53 when I wa daili with
you in the temple, ye stretch forth no hand against me: but thi is
your hour, and the power of darkness.

22:54 then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high
priest' house. and peter follow afar off.

22:55 and when they had kindl a fire in the midst of the hall, and
wer set down together, peter sat down among them.

22:56 but a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and
earnestli look upon him, and said, thi man wa also with him.

22:57 and he deni him, saying, woman, I know him not.

22:58 and after a littl while anoth saw him, and said, thou art
also of them. and peter said, man, I am not.

22:59 and about the space of one hour after anoth confidently
affirmed, saying, Of a truth thi fellow also wa with him: for he is
a galilaean.

22:60 and peter said, man, I know not what thou sayest. and
immediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew.

22:61 and the lord turned, and look upon peter. and peter remembered
th word of the lord, how he had said unto him, befor the cock crow,
thou shalt deni me thrice.

22:62 and peter went out, and wept bitterly.

22:63 and the men that held jesu mock him, and smote him.

22:64 and when they had blindfold him, they struck him on the face,
and ask him, saying, prophesy, who is it that smote thee?  22:65 and
mani other thing blasphem spake they against him.

22:66 and as soon as it wa day, the elder of the peopl and the
chief priest and the scribe came together, and led him into their
council, saying, 22:67 art thou the christ? tell us. and he said unto
them, If I tell you, ye will not believe: 22:68 and if I also ask you,
y will not answer me, nor let me go.

22:69 hereaft shall the son of man sit on the right hand of the
pow of god.

22:70 then said they all, art thou then the son of god? and he said
unto them, Ye say that I am.

22:71 and they said, what need we ani further witness? for we
ourselv have heard of hi own mouth.

23:1 and the whole multitud of them arose, and led him unto pilate.

23:2 and they began to accus him, saying, We found thi fellow
pervert the nation, and forbid to give tribut to caesar,
say that he himself is christ a king.

23:3 and pilat ask him, saying, art thou the king of the jews? and
h answer him and said, thou sayest it.

23:4 then said pilat to the chief priest and to the people, I find
no fault in thi man.

23:5 and they were the more fierce, saying, He stirreth up the people,
teach throughout all jewry, begin from galile to thi place.

23:6 when pilat heard of galilee, he ask whether the man were a
galilaean.

23:7 and as soon as he knew that he belong unto herod's
jurisdiction, he sent him to herod, who himself also wa at jerusalem
at that time.

23:8 and when herod saw jesus, he wa exceed glad: for he was
desir to see him of a long season, becaus he had heard mani things
of him; and he hope to have seen some miracl done by him.

23:9 then he question with him in mani words; but he answer him
nothing.

23:10 and the chief priest and scribe stood and vehement accused
him.

23:11 and herod with hi men of war set him at nought, and mock him,
and array him in a gorgeou robe, and sent him again to pilate.

23:12 and the same day pilat and herod were made friend together:
for befor they were at enmiti between themselves.

23:13 and pilate, when he had call togeth the chief priest and
th ruler and the people, 23:14 said unto them, Ye have brought this
man unto me, as one that perverteth the people: and, behold, I, having
examin him befor you, have found no fault in thi man touching
thos thing whereof ye accus him: 23:15 no, nor yet herod: for i
sent you to him; and, lo, noth worthi of death is done unto him.

23:16 I will therefor chastis him, and releas him.

23:17 (for of necess he must releas one unto them at the feast.)
23:18 and they cri out all at once, saying, away with thi man, and
releas unto us barabbas: 23:19 (who for a certain sedit made in
th city, and for murder, wa cast into prison.)  23:20 pilate
therefore, will to releas jesus, spake again to them.

23:21 but they cried, saying, crucifi him, crucifi him.

23:22 and he said unto them the third time, why, what evil hath he
done? I have found no caus of death in him: I will therefor chastise
him, and let him go.

23:23 and they were instant with loud voices, requir that he might
b crucified. and the voic of them and of the chief priests
prevailed.

23:24 and pilat gave sentenc that it should be as they required.

23:25 and he releas unto them him that for sedit and murder was
cast into prison, whom they had desired; but he deliv jesu to
their will.

23:26 and as they led him away, they laid hold upon one simon, a
cyrenian, come out of the country, and on him they laid the cross,
that he might bear it after jesus.

23:27 and there follow him a great compani of people, and of women,
which also bewail and lament him.

23:28 but jesu turn unto them said, daughter of jerusalem, weep
not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.

23:29 for, behold, the day are coming, in the which they shall say,
bless are the barren, and the womb that never bare, and the paps
which never gave suck.

23:30 then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall on us; and
to the hills, cover us.

23:31 for if they do these thing in a green tree, what shall be done
in the dry?  23:32 and there were also two other, malefactors, led
with him to be put to death.

23:33 and when they were come to the place, which is call calvary,
ther they crucifi him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand,
and the other on the left.

23:34 then said jesus, father, forgiv them; for they know not what
they do. and they part hi raiment, and cast lots.

23:35 and the peopl stood beholding. and the ruler also with them
derid him, saying, He save others; let him save himself, if he be
christ, the chosen of god.

23:36 and the soldier also mock him, come to him, and offering
him vinegar, 23:37 and saying, If thou be the king of the jews, save
thyself.

23:38 and a superscript also wa written over him in letter of
greek, and latin, and hebrew, thi IS the king OF the jews.

23:39 and one of the malefactor which were hang rail on him,
saying, If thou be christ, save thyself and us.

23:40 but the other answer rebuk him, saying, dost not thou fear
god, see thou art in the same condemnation?  23:41 and we indeed
justly; for we receiv the due reward of our deeds: but thi man hath
don noth amiss.

23:42 and he said unto jesus, lord, rememb me when thou comest into
thi kingdom.

23:43 and jesu said unto him, verili I say unto thee, To day shalt
thou be with me in paradise.

23:44 and it wa about the sixth hour, and there wa a dark over
al the earth until the ninth hour.

23:45 and the sun wa darkened, and the veil of the templ wa rent in
th midst.

23:46 and when jesu had cri with a loud voice, he said, father,
into thi hand I commend my spirit: and have said thus, he gave up
th ghost.

23:47 now when the centurion saw what wa done, he glorifi god,
saying, certainli thi wa a righteou man.

23:48 and all the peopl that came togeth to that sight, beholding
th thing which were done, smote their breasts, and returned.

23:49 and all hi acquaintance, and the women that follow him from
galilee, stood afar off, behold these things.

23:50 and, behold, there wa a man name joseph, a counsellor; and he
wa a good man, and a just: 23:51 (the same had not consent to the
counsel and deed of them;) he wa of arimathaea, a citi of the jews:
who also himself wait for the kingdom of god.

23:52 thi man went unto pilate, and beg the bodi of jesus.

23:53 and he took it down, and wrap it in linen, and laid it in a
sepulchr that wa hewn in stone, wherein never man befor wa laid.

23:54 and that day wa the preparation, and the sabbath drew on.

23:55 and the women also, which came with him from galilee, followed
after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how hi bodi wa laid.

23:56 and they returned, and prepar spice and ointments; and rested
th sabbath day accord to the commandment.

24:1 now upon the first day of the week, veri earli in the morning,
they came unto the sepulchre, bring the spice which they had
prepared, and certain other with them.

24:2 and they found the stone roll away from the sepulchre.

24:3 and they enter in, and found not the bodi of the lord jesus.

24:4 and it came to pass, as they were much perplex thereabout,
behold, two men stood by them in shine garments: 24:5 and as they
wer afraid, and bow down their face to the earth, they said unto
them, whi seek ye the live among the dead?  24:6 He is not here, but
i risen: rememb how he spake unto you when he wa yet in galilee,
24:7 saying, the son of man must be deliv into the hand of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

24:8 and they rememb hi words, 24:9 and return from the
sepulchre, and told all these thing unto the eleven, and to all the
rest.

24:10 It wa mari magdalen and joanna, and mari the mother of james,
and other women that were with them, which told these thing unto the
apostles.

24:11 and their word seem to them as idl tales, and they believed
them not.

24:12 then aros peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stoop down,
h beheld the linen cloth laid by themselves, and departed,
wond in himself at that which wa come to pass.

24:13 and, behold, two of them went that same day to a villag called
emmaus, which wa from jerusalem about threescor furlongs.

24:14 and they talk togeth of all these thing which had happened.

24:15 and it came to pass, that, while they commun togeth and
reasoned, jesu himself drew near, and went with them.

24:16 but their eye were holden that they should not know him.

24:17 and he said unto them, what manner of commun are these
that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?  24:18 and the
on of them, whose name wa cleopas, answer said unto him, art thou
onli a stranger in jerusalem, and hast not known the thing which are
com to pass there in these days?  24:19 and he said unto them, what
things? and they said unto him, concern jesu of nazareth, which
wa a prophet mighti in deed and word befor god and all the people:
24:20 and how the chief priest and our ruler deliv him to be
condemn to death, and have crucifi him.

24:21 but we trust that it had been he which should have redeemed
israel: and besid all this, to day is the third day sinc these
th were done.

24:22 yea, and certain women also of our compani made us astonished,
which were earli at the sepulchre; 24:23 and when they found not his
body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels,
which said that he wa alive.

24:24 and certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre,
and found it even so as the women had said: but him they saw not.

24:25 then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe
al that the prophet have spoken: 24:26 ought not christ to have
suff these things, and to enter into hi glory?  24:27 and
begin at mose and all the prophets, he expound unto them in all
th scriptur the thing concern himself.

24:28 and they drew nigh unto the village, whither they went: and he
mad as though he would have gone further.

24:29 but they constrain him, saying, abid with us: for it is
toward evening, and the day is far spent. and he went in to tarri with
them.

24:30 and it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread,
and bless it, and brake, and gave to them.

24:31 and their eye were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished
out of their sight.

24:32 and they said one to another, did not our heart burn within us,
whil he talk with us by the way, and while he open to us the
scriptures?  24:33 and they rose up the same hour, and return to
jerusalem, and found the eleven gather together, and them that were
with them, 24:34 saying, the lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared
to simon.

24:35 and they told what thing were done in the way, and how he was
known of them in break of bread.

24:36 and as they thu spake, jesu himself stood in the midst of
them, and saith unto them, peac be unto you.

24:37 but they were terrifi and affrighted, and suppos that they
had seen a spirit.

24:38 and he said unto them, whi are ye troubled? and whi do thoughts
aris in your hearts?  24:39 behold my hand and my feet, that it is i
myself: handl me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as
y see me have.

24:40 and when he had thu spoken, he shew them hi hand and his
feet.

24:41 and while they yet believ not for joy, and wondered, he said
unto them, have ye here ani meat?  24:42 and they gave him a piec of
a broil fish, and of an honeycomb.

24:43 and he took it, and did eat befor them.

24:44 and he said unto them, these are the word which I spake unto
you, while I wa yet with you, that all thing must be fulfilled,
which were written in the law of moses, and in the prophets, and in
th psalms, concern me.

24:45 then open he their understanding, that they might understand
th scriptures, 24:46 and said unto them, thu it is written, and thus
it behov christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:
24:47 and that repent and remiss of sin should be preach in
hi name among all nations, begin at jerusalem.

24:48 and ye are wit of these things.

24:49 and, behold, I send the promis of my father upon you: but tarry
y in the citi of jerusalem, until ye be endu with power from on
high.

24:50 and he led them out as far as to bethany, and he lift up his
hands, and bless them.

24:51 and it came to pass, while he bless them, he wa part from
them, and carri up into heaven.

24:52 and they worship him, and return to jerusalem with great
joy: 24:53 and were continu in the temple, prais and blessing
god. amen.




th gospel accord to saint john


1:1 In the begin wa the word, and the word wa with god, and the
word wa god.

1:2 the same wa in the begin with god.

1:3 all thing were made by him; and without him wa not ani thing
mad that wa made.

1:4 In him wa life; and the life wa the light of men.

1:5 and the light shineth in darkness; and the dark comprehended
it not.

1:6 there wa a man sent from god, whose name wa john.

1:7 the same came for a witness, to bear wit of the light, that
al men through him might believe.

1:8 He wa not that light, but wa sent to bear wit of that light.

1:9 that wa the true light, which lighteth everi man that cometh into
th world.

1:10 He wa in the world, and the world wa made by him, and the world
knew him not.

1:11 He came unto hi own, and hi own receiv him not.

1:12 but as mani as receiv him, to them gave he power to becom the
son of god, even to them that believ on hi name: 1:13 which were
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of god.

1:14 and the word wa made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld
hi glory, the glori as of the onli begotten of the father,) full of
grac and truth.

1:15 john bare wit of him, and cried, saying, thi wa he of whom
i spake, He that cometh after me is prefer befor me: for he was
befor me.

1:16 and of hi ful have all we received, and grace for grace.

1:17 for the law wa given by moses, but grace and truth came by jesus
christ.

1:18 No man hath seen god at ani time, the onli begotten son, which is
in the bosom of the father, he hath declar him.

1:19 and thi is the record of john, when the jew sent priest and
levit from jerusalem to ask him, who art thou?  1:20 and he
confessed, and deni not; but confessed, I am not the christ.

1:21 and they ask him, what then? art thou elias? and he saith, I am
not. art thou that prophet? and he answered, no.

1:22 then said they unto him, who art thou? that we may give an answer
to them that sent us. what sayest thou of thyself?  1:23 He said, I am
th voic of one cri in the wilderness, make straight the way of
th lord, as said the prophet esaias.

1:24 and they which were sent were of the pharisees.

1:25 and they ask him, and said unto him, whi baptizest thou then,
if thou be not that christ, nor elias, neither that prophet?  1:26
john answer them, saying, I baptiz with water: but there standeth
on among you, whom ye know not; 1:27 He it is, who come after me is
pref befor me, whose shoe' latchet I am not worthi to unloose.

1:28 these thing were done in bethabara beyond jordan, where john was
baptizing.

1:29 the next day john seeth jesu come unto him, and saith, behold
th lamb of god, which taketh away the sin of the world.

1:30 thi is he of whom I said, after me cometh a man which is
pref befor me: for he wa befor me.

1:31 and I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to
israel, therefor am I come baptiz with water.

1:32 and john bare record, saying, I saw the spirit descend from
heaven like a dove, and it abod upon him.

1:33 and I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptiz with water,
th same said unto me, upon whom thou shalt see the spirit descending,
and remain on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the holy
ghost.

1:34 and I saw, and bare record that thi is the son of god.

1:35 again the next day after john stood, and two of hi disciples;
1:36 and look upon jesu as he walked, he saith, behold the lamb of
god!  1:37 and the two discipl heard him speak, and they followed
jesus.

1:38 then jesu turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them,
what seek ye? they said unto him, rabbi, (which is to say, being
interpreted, master,) where dwellest thou?  1:39 He saith unto them,
com and see. they came and saw where he dwelt, and abod with him
that day: for it wa about the tenth hour.

1:40 one of the two which heard john speak, and follow him, was
andrew, simon peter' brother.

1:41 He first findeth hi own brother simon, and saith unto him, we
hav found the messias, which is, be interpreted, the christ.

1:42 and he brought him to jesus. and when jesu beheld him, he said,
thou art simon the son of jona: thou shalt be call cephas, which is
bi interpretation, A stone.

1:43 the day follow jesu would go forth into galilee, and findeth
philip, and saith unto him, follow me.

1:44 now philip wa of bethsaida, the citi of andrew and peter.

1:45 philip findeth nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him,
of whom mose in the law, and the prophets, did write, jesu of
nazareth, the son of joseph.

1:46 and nathanael said unto him, can there ani good thing come out of
nazareth? philip saith unto him, come and see.

1:47 jesu saw nathanael come to him, and saith of him, behold an
israelit indeed, in whom is no guile!  1:48 nathanael saith unto him,
whenc knowest thou me? jesu answer and said unto him, befor that
philip call thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.

1:49 nathanael answer and saith unto him, rabbi, thou art the son of
god; thou art the king of israel.

1:50 jesu answer and said unto him, becaus I said unto thee, I saw
the under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things
than these.

1:51 and he saith unto him, verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter
y shall see heaven open, and the angel of god ascend and
descend upon the son of man.

2:1 and the third day there wa a marriag in cana of galilee; and the
moth of jesu wa there: 2:2 and both jesu wa called, and his
disciples, to the marriage.

2:3 and when they want wine, the mother of jesu saith unto him,
they have no wine.

2:4 jesu saith unto her, woman, what have I to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come.

2:5 hi mother saith unto the servants, whatsoev he saith unto you,
do it.

2:6 and there were set there six waterpot of stone, after the manner
of the purifi of the jews, contain two or three firkin apiece.

2:7 jesu saith unto them, fill the waterpot with water. and they
fil them up to the brim.

2:8 and he saith unto them, draw out now, and bear unto the governor
of the feast. and they bare it.

2:9 when the ruler of the feast had tast the water that wa made
wine, and knew not whenc it was: (but the servant which drew the
wat knew;) the governor of the feast call the bridegroom, 2:10 and
saith unto him, everi man at the begin doth set forth good wine;
and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou hast
kept the good wine until now.

2:11 thi begin of miracl did jesu in cana of galilee, and
manifest forth hi glory; and hi discipl believ on him.

2:12 after thi he went down to capernaum, he, and hi mother, and his
brethren, and hi disciples: and they continu there not mani days.

2:13 and the jews' passov wa at hand, and jesu went up to
jerusalem.

2:14 and found in the templ those that sold oxen and sheep and doves,
and the changer of money sitting: 2:15 and when he had made a scourge
of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep,
and the oxen; and pour out the changers' money, and overthrew the
tables; 2:16 and said unto them that sold doves, take these things
hence; make not my father' hous an hous of merchandise.

2:17 and hi discipl rememb that it wa written, the zeal of
thin hous hath eaten me up.

2:18 then answer the jew and said unto him, what sign shewest thou
unto us, see that thou doest these things?  2:19 jesu answer and
said unto them, destroy thi temple, and in three day I will rais it
up.

2:20 then said the jews, forti and six year wa thi templ in
building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?  2:21 but he spake
of the templ of hi body.

2:22 when therefor he wa risen from the dead, hi disciples
rememb that he had said thi unto them; and they believ the
scripture, and the word which jesu had said.

2:23 now when he wa in jerusalem at the passover, in the feast day,
mani believ in hi name, when they saw the miracl which he did.

2:24 but jesu did not commit himself unto them, becaus he knew all
men, 2:25 and need not that ani should testifi of man: for he knew
what wa in man.

3:1 there wa a man of the pharisees, name nicodemus, a ruler of the
jews: 3:2 the same came to jesu by night, and said unto him, rabbi,
w know that thou art a teacher come from god: for no man can do these
miracl that thou doest, except god be with him.

3:3 jesu answer and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of god.

3:4 nicodemu saith unto him, how can a man be born when he is old?
can he enter the second time into hi mother' womb, and be born?  3:5
jesu answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born
of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of god.

3:6 that which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born
of the spirit is spirit.

3:7 marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.

3:8 the wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
thereof, but canst not tell whenc it cometh, and whither it goeth: so
i everi one that is born of the spirit.

3:9 nicodemu answer and said unto him, how can these thing be?
3:10 jesu answer and said unto him, art thou a master of israel,
and knowest not these things?  3:11 verily, verily, I say unto thee,
w speak that we do know, and testifi that we have seen; and ye
rec not our witness.

3:12 If I have told you earthli things, and ye believ not, how shall
y believe, if I tell you of heavenli things?  3:13 and no man hath
ascend up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the son
of man which is in heaven.

3:14 and as mose lift up the serpent in the wilderness, even so
must the son of man be lift up: 3:15 that whosoev believeth in him
should not perish, but have etern life.

3:16 for god so love the world, that he gave hi onli begotten son,
that whosoev believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlast life.

3:17 for god sent not hi son into the world to condemn the world; but
that the world through him might be saved.

3:18 He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth
not is condemn already, becaus he hath not believ in the name of
th onli begotten son of god.

3:19 and thi is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men love dark rather than light, becaus their deed were
evil.

3:20 for everi one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to
th light, lest hi deed should be reproved.

3:21 but he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that hi deed may
b made manifest, that they are wrought in god.

3:22 after these thing came jesu and hi discipl into the land of
judaea; and there he tarri with them, and baptized.

3:23 and john also wa baptiz in aenon near to salim, becaus there
wa much water there: and they came, and were baptized.

3:24 for john wa not yet cast into prison.

3:25 then there aros a question between some of john' discipl and
th jew about purifying.

3:26 and they came unto john, and said unto him, rabbi, he that was
with thee beyond jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same
baptizeth, and all men come to him.

3:27 john answer and said, A man can receiv nothing, except it be
given him from heaven.

3:28 Ye yourselv bear me witness, that I said, I am not the christ,
but that I am sent befor him.

3:29 He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatli because
of the bridegroom' voice: thi my joy therefor is fulfilled.

3:30 He must increase, but I must decrease.

3:31 He that cometh from abov is abov all: he that is of the earth
i earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that cometh from heaven is
abov all.

3:32 and what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no man
receiveth hi testimony.

3:33 He that hath receiv hi testimoni hath set to hi seal that god
i true.

3:34 for he whom god hath sent speaketh the word of god: for god
giveth not the spirit by measur unto him.

3:35 the father loveth the son, and hath given all thing into his
hand.

3:36 He that believeth on the son hath everlast life: and he that
believeth not the son shall not see life; but the wrath of god abideth
on him.

4:1 when therefor the lord knew how the pharise had heard that
jesu made and baptiz more discipl than john, 4:2 (though jesus
himself baptiz not, but hi disciples,) 4:3 He left judaea, and
depart again into galilee.

4:4 and he must need go through samaria.

4:5 then cometh he to a citi of samaria, which is call sychar, near
to the parcel of ground that jacob gave to hi son joseph.

4:6 now jacob' well wa there. jesu therefore, be weari with
hi journey, sat thu on the well: and it wa about the sixth hour.

4:7 there cometh a woman of samaria to draw water: jesu saith unto
her, give me to drink.

4:8 (for hi discipl were gone away unto the citi to buy meat.)  4:9
then saith the woman of samaria unto him, how is it that thou, be a
jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of samaria? for the jews
hav no deal with the samaritans.

4:10 jesu answer and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of
god, and who it is that saith to thee, give me to drink; thou wouldest
hav ask of him, and he would have given thee live water.

4:11 the woman saith unto him, sir, thou hast noth to draw with,
and the well is deep: from whenc then hast thou that live water?
4:12 art thou greater than our father jacob, which gave us the well,
and drank thereof himself, and hi children, and hi cattle?  4:13
jesu answer and said unto her, whosoev drinketh of thi water
shal thirst again: 4:14 but whosoev drinketh of the water that i
shal give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him
shal be in him a well of water spring up into everlast life.

4:15 the woman saith unto him, sir, give me thi water, that I thirst
not, neither come hither to draw.

4:16 jesu saith unto her, go, call thi husband, and come hither.

4:17 the woman answer and said, I have no husband. jesu said unto
her, thou hast well said, I have no husband: 4:18 for thou hast had
fiv husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thi husband: in that
saidst thou truly.

4:19 the woman saith unto him, sir, I perceiv that thou art a
prophet.

4:20 our father worship in thi mountain; and ye say, that in
jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.

4:21 jesu saith unto her, woman, believ me, the hour cometh, when ye
shal neither in thi mountain, nor yet at jerusalem, worship the
father.

4:22 Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for
salv is of the jews.

4:23 but the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshipp shall
worship the father in spirit and in truth: for the father seeketh such
to worship him.

4:24 god is a spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth.

4:25 the woman saith unto him, I know that messia cometh, which is
cal christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.

4:26 jesu saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am he.

4:27 and upon thi came hi disciples, and marvel that he talked
with the woman: yet no man said, what seekest thou? or, whi talkest
th with her?  4:28 the woman then left her waterpot, and went her
way into the city, and saith to the men, 4:29 come, see a man, which
told me all thing that ever I did: is not thi the christ?  4:30 then
they went out of the city, and came unto him.

4:31 In the mean while hi discipl pray him, saying, master, eat.

4:32 but he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of.

4:33 therefor said the discipl one to another, hath ani man brought
him ought to eat?  4:34 jesu saith unto them, My meat is to do the
wil of him that sent me, and to finish hi work.

4:35 say not ye, there are yet four months, and then cometh harvest?
behold, I say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for
they are white alreadi to harvest.

4:36 and he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto
lif eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice
together.

4:37 and herein is that say true, one soweth, and anoth reapeth.

4:38 I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestow no labour: other men
laboured, and ye are enter into their labours.

4:39 and mani of the samaritan of that citi believ on him for the
say of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did.

4:40 So when the samaritan were come unto him, they besought him that
h would tarri with them: and he abod there two days.

4:41 and mani more believ becaus of hi own word; 4:42 and said
unto the woman, now we believe, not becaus of thi saying: for we have
heard him ourselves, and know that thi is inde the christ, the
saviour of the world.

4:43 now after two day he depart thence, and went into galilee.

4:44 for jesu himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his
own country.

4:45 then when he wa come into galilee, the galilaean receiv him,
hav seen all the thing that he did at jerusalem at the feast: for
they also went unto the feast.

4:46 So jesu came again into cana of galilee, where he made the water
wine. and there wa a certain nobleman, whose son wa sick at
capernaum.

4:47 when he heard that jesu wa come out of judaea into galilee, he
went unto him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his
son: for he wa at the point of death.

4:48 then said jesu unto him, except ye see sign and wonders, ye
wil not believe.

4:49 the nobleman saith unto him, sir, come down ere my child die.

4:50 jesu saith unto him, Go thi way; thi son liveth. and the man
believ the word that jesu had spoken unto him, and he went hi way.

4:51 and as he wa now go down, hi servant met him, and told him,
saying, thi son liveth.

4:52 then enquir he of them the hour when he began to amend. and
they said unto him, yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.

4:53 So the father knew that it wa at the same hour, in the which
jesu said unto him, thi son liveth: and himself believed, and his
whol house.

4:54 thi is again the second miracl that jesu did, when he wa come
out of judaea into galilee.

5:1 after thi there wa a feast of the jews; and jesu went up to
jerusalem.

5:2 now there is at jerusalem by the sheep market a pool, which is
cal in the hebrew tongu bethesda, have five porches.

5:3 In these lay a great multitud of impot folk, of blind, halt,
withered, wait for the move of the water.

5:4 for an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and
troubl the water: whosoev then first after the troubl of the
wat step in wa made whole of whatsoev diseas he had.

5:5 and a certain man wa there, which had an infirm thirti and
eight years.

5:6 when jesu saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time
in that case, he saith unto him, wilt thou be made whole?  5:7 the
impot man answer him, sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another
steppeth down befor me.

5:8 jesu saith unto him, rise, take up thi bed, and walk.

5:9 and immedi the man wa made whole, and took up hi bed, and
walked: and on the same day wa the sabbath.

5:10 the jew therefor said unto him that wa cured, It is the
sabbath day: it is not law for thee to carri thi bed.

5:11 He answer them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me,
tak up thi bed, and walk.

5:12 then ask they him, what man is that which said unto thee, take
up thi bed, and walk?  5:13 and he that wa heal wist not who it
was: for jesu had convey himself away, a multitud be in that
place.

5:14 afterward jesu findeth him in the temple, and said unto him,
behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a wors thing come unto
thee.

5:15 the man departed, and told the jew that it wa jesus, which had
mad him whole.

5:16 and therefor did the jew persecut jesus, and sought to slay
him, becaus he had done these thing on the sabbath day.

5:17 but jesu answer them, My father worketh hitherto, and I work.

5:18 therefor the jew sought the more to kill him, becaus he not
onli had broken the sabbath, but said also that god wa hi father,
mak himself equal with god.

5:19 then answer jesu and said unto them, verily, verily, I say
unto you, the son can do noth of himself, but what he seeth the
fath do: for what thing soever he doeth, these also doeth the son
likewise.

5:20 for the father loveth the son, and sheweth him all thing that
himself doeth: and he will shew him greater work than these, that ye
may marvel.

5:21 for as the father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even
so the son quickeneth whom he will.

5:22 for the father judgeth no man, but hath commit all judgment
unto the son: 5:23 that all men should honour the son, even as they
honour the father.

h that honoureth not the son honoureth not the father which hath sent
him.

5:24 verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and
believeth on him that sent me, hath everlast life, and shall not
com into condemnation; but is pass from death unto life.

5:25 verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voic of the son of god: and they that
hear shall live.

5:26 for as the father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the
son to have life in himself; 5:27 and hath given him author to
execut judgment also, becaus he is the son of man.

5:28 marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that
ar in the grave shall hear hi voice, 5:29 and shall come forth;
they that have done good, unto the resurrect of life; and they that
hav done evil, unto the resurrect of damnation.

5:30 I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my
judg is just; becaus I seek not mine own will, but the will of
th father which hath sent me.

5:31 If I bear wit of myself, my wit is not true.

5:32 there is anoth that beareth wit of me; and I know that the
wit which he witnesseth of me is true.

5:33 Ye sent unto john, and he bare wit unto the truth.

5:34 but I receiv not testimoni from man: but these thing I say,
that ye might be saved.

5:35 He wa a burn and a shine light: and ye were will for a
season to rejoic in hi light.

5:36 but I have greater wit than that of john: for the work which
th father hath given me to finish, the same work that I do, bear
wit of me, that the father hath sent me.

5:37 and the father himself, which hath sent me, hath born wit of
me.

y have neither heard hi voic at ani time, nor seen hi shape.

5:38 and ye have not hi word abid in you: for whom he hath sent,
him ye believ not.

5:39 search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have etern life:
and they are they which testifi of me.

5:40 and ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.

5:41 I receiv not honour from men.

5:42 but I know you, that ye have not the love of god in you.

5:43 I am come in my father' name, and ye receiv me not: if another
shal come in hi own name, him ye will receive.

5:44 how can ye believe, which receiv honour one of another, and seek
not the honour that cometh from god only?  5:45 Do not think that i
wil accus you to the father: there is one that accuseth you, even
moses, in whom ye trust.

5:46 for had ye believ moses, ye would have believ me; for he
wrot of me.

5:47 but if ye believ not hi writings, how shall ye believ my
words?  6:1 after these thing jesu went over the sea of galilee,
which is the sea of tiberias.

6:2 and a great multitud follow him, becaus they saw hi miracles
which he did on them that were diseased.

6:3 and jesu went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his
disciples.

6:4 and the passover, a feast of the jews, wa nigh.

6:5 when jesu then lift up hi eyes, and saw a great compani come
unto him, he saith unto philip, whenc shall we buy bread, that these
may eat?  6:6 and thi he said to prove him: for he himself knew what
h would do.

6:7 philip answer him, two hundr pennyworth of bread is not
suffici for them, that everi one of them may take a little.

6:8 one of hi disciples, andrew, simon peter' brother, saith unto
him, 6:9 there is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two
smal fishes: but what are they among so many?  6:10 and jesu said,
mak the men sit down. now there wa much grass in the place. So the
men sat down, in number about five thousand.

6:11 and jesu took the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he
distribut to the disciples, and the discipl to them that were set
down; and likewis of the fish as much as they would.

6:12 when they were filled, he said unto hi disciples, gather up the
frag that remain, that noth be lost.

6:13 therefor they gather them together, and fill twelv baskets
with the fragment of the five barley loaves, which remain over and
abov unto them that had eaten.

6:14 then those men, when they had seen the miracl that jesu did,
said, thi is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world.

6:15 when jesu therefor perceiv that they would come and take him
bi force, to make him a king, he depart again into a mountain
himself alone.

6:16 and when even wa now come, hi discipl went down unto the sea,
6:17 and enter into a ship, and went over the sea toward capernaum.
and it wa now dark, and jesu wa not come to them.

6:18 and the sea aros by reason of a great wind that blew.

6:19 So when they had row about five and twenti or thirti furlongs,
they see jesu walk on the sea, and draw nigh unto the ship: and
they were afraid.

6:20 but he saith unto them, It is I; be not afraid.

6:21 then they willingli receiv him into the ship: and immediately
th ship wa at the land whither they went.

6:22 the day following, when the peopl which stood on the other side
of the sea saw that there wa none other boat there, save that one
whereinto hi discipl were entered, and that jesu went not with his
discipl into the boat, but that hi discipl were gone away alone;
6:23 (howbeit there came other boat from tiberia nigh unto the place
wher they did eat bread, after that the lord had given thanks:) 6:24
when the peopl therefor saw that jesu wa not there, neither his
disciples, they also took shipping, and came to capernaum, seek for
jesus.

6:25 and when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they
said unto him, rabbi, when camest thou hither?  6:26 jesu answered
them and said, verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because
y saw the miracles, but becaus ye did eat of the loaves, and were
filled.

6:27 labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which
endureth unto everlast life, which the son of man shall give unto
you: for him hath god the father sealed.

6:28 then said they unto him, what shall we do, that we might work the
work of god?  6:29 jesu answer and said unto them, thi is the
work of god, that ye believ on him whom he hath sent.

6:30 they said therefor unto him, what sign shewest thou then, that
w may see, and believ thee? what dost thou work?  6:31 our fathers
did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from
heaven to eat.

6:32 then jesu said unto them, verily, verily, I say unto you, moses
gav you not that bread from heaven; but my father giveth you the true
bread from heaven.

6:33 for the bread of god is he which cometh down from heaven, and
giveth life unto the world.

6:34 then said they unto him, lord, evermor give us thi bread.

6:35 and jesu said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh
to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never
thirst.

6:36 but I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believ not.

6:37 all that the father giveth me shall come to me; and him that
cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.

6:38 for I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the
wil of him that sent me.

6:39 and thi is the father' will which hath sent me, that of all
which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should rais it up
again at the last day.

6:40 and thi is the will of him that sent me, that everi one which
seeth the son, and believeth on him, may have everlast life: and i
wil rais him up at the last day.

6:41 the jew then murmur at him, becaus he said, I am the bread
which came down from heaven.

6:42 and they said, Is not thi jesus, the son of joseph, whose father
and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from
heaven?  6:43 jesu therefor answer and said unto them, murmur not
among yourselves.

6:44 No man can come to me, except the father which hath sent me draw
him: and I will rais him up at the last day.

6:45 It is written in the prophets, and they shall be all taught of
god.

everi man therefor that hath heard, and hath learn of the father,
cometh unto me.

6:46 not that ani man hath seen the father, save he which is of god,
h hath seen the father.

6:47 verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath
everlast life.

6:48 I am that bread of life.

6:49 your father did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

6:50 thi is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may
eat thereof, and not die.

6:51 I am the live bread which came down from heaven: if ani man eat
of thi bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give
i my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

6:52 the jew therefor strove among themselves, saying, how can this
man give us hi flesh to eat?  6:53 then jesu said unto them, verily,
verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink hi blood, ye have no life in you.

6:54 whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath etern life;
and I will rais him up at the last day.

6:55 for my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.

6:56 He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me,
and I in him.

6:57 As the live father hath sent me, and I live by the father: so
h that eateth me, even he shall live by me.

6:58 thi is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your
fath did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of thi bread
shal live for ever.

6:59 these thing said he in the synagogue, as he taught in capernaum.

6:60 mani therefor of hi disciples, when they had heard this, said,
thi is an hard saying; who can hear it?  6:61 when jesu knew in
himself that hi discipl murmur at it, he said unto them, doth
thi offend you?  6:62 what and if ye shall see the son of man ascend
up where he wa before?  6:63 It is the spirit that quickeneth; the
flesh profiteth nothing: the word that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life.

6:64 but there are some of you that believ not. for jesu knew from
th begin who they were that believ not, and who should betray
him.

6:65 and he said, therefor said I unto you, that no man can come unto
me, except it were given unto him of my father.

6:66 from that time mani of hi discipl went back, and walk no
mor with him.

6:67 then said jesu unto the twelve, will ye also go away?  6:68 then
simon peter answer him, lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the
word of etern life.

6:69 and we believ and are sure that thou art that christ, the son of
th live god.

6:70 jesu answer them, have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you
i a devil?  6:71 He spake of juda iscariot the son of simon: for he
it wa that should betray him, be one of the twelve.

7:1 after these thing jesu walk in galilee: for he would not walk
in jewry, becaus the jew sought to kill him.

7:2 now the jew' feast of tabernacl wa at hand.

7:3 hi brethren therefor said unto him, depart hence, and go into
judaea, that thi discipl also may see the work that thou doest.

7:4 for there is no man that doeth ani thing in secret, and he himself
seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to
th world.

7:5 for neither did hi brethren believ in him.

7:6 then jesu said unto them, My time is not yet come: but your time
i alway ready.

7:7 the world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, becaus I testifi of
it, that the work thereof are evil.

7:8 Go ye up unto thi feast: I go not up yet unto thi feast: for my
tim is not yet full come.

7:9 when he had said these word unto them, he abod still in galilee.

7:10 but when hi brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the
feast, not openly, but as it were in secret.

7:11 then the jew sought him at the feast, and said, where is he?
7:12 and there wa much murmur among the peopl concern him: for
som said, He is a good man: other said, nay; but he deceiveth the
people.

7:13 howbeit no man spake openli of him for fear of the jews.

7:14 now about the midst of the feast jesu went up into the temple,
and taught.

7:15 and the jew marvelled, saying, how knoweth thi man letters,
hav never learned?  7:16 jesu answer them, and said, My doctrine
i not mine, but hi that sent me.

7:17 If ani man will do hi will, he shall know of the doctrine,
wheth it be of god, or whether I speak of myself.

7:18 He that speaketh of himself seeketh hi own glory: but he that
seeketh hi glori that sent him, the same is true, and no
unright is in him.

7:19 did not mose give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the
law?  whi go ye about to kill me?  7:20 the peopl answer and said,
thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kill thee?  7:21 jesu answered
and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel.

7:22 mose therefor gave unto you circumcision; (not becaus it is of
moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcis a
man.

7:23 If a man on the sabbath day receiv circumcision, that the law of
mos should not be broken; are ye angri at me, becaus I have made a
man everi whit whole on the sabbath day?  7:24 judg not accord to
th appearance, but judg righteou judgment.

7:25 then said some of them of jerusalem, Is not thi he, whom they
seek to kill?  7:26 but, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing
unto him. Do the ruler know inde that thi is the veri christ?
7:27 howbeit we know thi man whenc he is: but when christ cometh, no
man knoweth whenc he is.

7:28 then cri jesu in the templ as he taught, saying, Ye both know
me, and ye know whenc I am: and I am not come of myself, but he that
sent me is true, whom ye know not.

7:29 but I know him: for I am from him, and he hath sent me.

7:30 then they sought to take him: but no man laid hand on him,
becaus hi hour wa not yet come.

7:31 and mani of the peopl believ on him, and said, when christ
cometh, will he do more miracl than these which thi man hath done?
7:32 the pharise heard that the peopl murmur such things
concern him; and the pharise and the chief priest sent officers
to take him.

7:33 then said jesu unto them, yet a littl while am I with you, and
then I go unto him that sent me.

7:34 Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither
y cannot come.

7:35 then said the jew among themselves, whither will he go, that we
shal not find him? will he go unto the dispers among the gentiles,
and teach the gentiles?  7:36 what manner of say is thi that he
said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither
y cannot come?  7:37 In the last day, that great day of the feast,
jesu stood and cried, saying, If ani man thirst, let him come unto
me, and drink.

7:38 He that believeth on me, as the scriptur hath said, out of his
belli shall flow river of live water.

7:39 (but thi spake he of the spirit, which they that believ on him
should receive: for the holi ghost wa not yet given; becaus that
jesu wa not yet glorified.)  7:40 mani of the peopl therefore, when
they heard thi saying, said, Of a truth thi is the prophet.

7:41 other said, thi is the christ. but some said, shall christ come
out of galilee?  7:42 hath not the scriptur said, that christ cometh
of the seed of david, and out of the town of bethlehem, where david
was?  7:43 So there wa a divis among the peopl becaus of him.

7:44 and some of them would have taken him; but no man laid hand on
him.

7:45 then came the offic to the chief priest and pharisees; and
they said unto them, whi have ye not brought him?  7:46 the officers
answered, never man spake like thi man.

7:47 then answer them the pharisees, are ye also deceived?  7:48
have ani of the ruler or of the pharise believ on him?  7:49 but
thi peopl who knoweth not the law are cursed.

7:50 nicodemu saith unto them, (he that came to jesu by night, being
on of them,) 7:51 doth our law judg ani man, befor it hear him, and
know what he doeth?  7:52 they answer and said unto him, art thou
also of galilee?  search, and look: for out of galile ariseth no
prophet.

7:53 and everi man went unto hi own house.

8:1 jesu went unto the mount of olives.

8:2 and earli in the morn he came again into the temple, and all
th peopl came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them.

8:3 and the scribe and pharise brought unto him a woman taken in
adultery; and when they had set her in the midst, 8:4 they say unto
him, master, thi woman wa taken in adultery, in the veri act.

8:5 now mose in the law command us, that such should be stoned: but
what sayest thou?  8:6 thi they said, tempt him, that they might
hav to accus him. but jesu stoop down, and with hi finger wrote
on the ground, as though he heard them not.

8:7 So when they continu ask him, he lift up himself, and said
unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a
ston at her.

8:8 and again he stoop down, and wrote on the ground.

8:9 and they which heard it, be convict by their own conscience,
w out one by one, begin at the eldest, even unto the last: and
jesu wa left alone, and the woman stand in the midst.

8:10 when jesu had lift up himself, and saw none but the woman, he
said unto her, woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man
condemn thee?  8:11 she said, No man, lord. and jesu said unto her,
neith do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.

8:12 then spake jesu again unto them, saying, I am the light of the
world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
th light of life.

8:13 the pharise therefor said unto him, thou bearest record of
thyself; thi record is not true.

8:14 jesu answer and said unto them, though I bear record of
myself, yet my record is true: for I know whenc I came, and whither i
go; but ye cannot tell whenc I come, and whither I go.

8:15 Ye judg after the flesh; I judg no man.

8:16 and yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but
i and the father that sent me.

8:17 It is also written in your law, that the testimoni of two men is
true.

8:18 I am one that bear wit of myself, and the father that sent me
beareth wit of me.

8:19 then said they unto him, where is thi father? jesu answered, ye
neith know me, nor my father: if ye had known me, ye should have
known my father also.

8:20 these word spake jesu in the treasury, as he taught in the
temple: and no man laid hand on him; for hi hour wa not yet come.

8:21 then said jesu again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek
me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come.

8:22 then said the jews, will he kill himself? becaus he saith,
whith I go, ye cannot come.

8:23 and he said unto them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye
ar of thi world; I am not of thi world.

8:24 I said therefor unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if
y believ not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

8:25 then said they unto him, who art thou? and jesu saith unto them,
even the same that I said unto you from the beginning.

8:26 I have mani thing to say and to judg of you: but he that sent
m is true; and I speak to the world those thing which I have heard
of him.

8:27 they understood not that he spake to them of the father.

8:28 then said jesu unto them, when ye have lift up the son of man,
then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do noth of myself; but
a my father hath taught me, I speak these things.

8:29 and he that sent me is with me: the father hath not left me
alone; for I do alway those thing that pleas him.

8:30 As he spake these words, mani believ on him.

8:31 then said jesu to those jew which believ on him, If ye
continu in my word, then are ye my discipl indeed; 8:32 and ye
shal know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

8:33 they answer him, We be abraham' seed, and were never in
bondag to ani man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?  8:34
jesu answer them, verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin.

8:35 and the servant abideth not in the hous for ever: but the son
abideth ever.

8:36 If the son therefor shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed.

8:37 I know that ye are abraham' seed; but ye seek to kill me,
becaus my word hath no place in you.

8:38 I speak that which I have seen with my father: and ye do that
which ye have seen with your father.

8:39 they answer and said unto him, abraham is our father. jesus
saith unto them, If ye were abraham' children, ye would do the works
of abraham.

8:40 but now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth,
which I have heard of god: thi did not abraham.

8:41 Ye do the deed of your father. then said they to him, We be not
born of fornication; we have one father, even god.

8:42 jesu said unto them, If god were your father, ye would love me:
for I proceed forth and came from god; neither came I of myself, but
h sent me.

8:43 whi do ye not understand my speech? even becaus ye cannot hear
mi word.

8:44 Ye are of your father the devil, and the lust of your father ye
wil do. He wa a murder from the beginning, and abod not in the
truth, becaus there is no truth in him. when he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of hi own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.

8:45 and becaus I tell you the truth, ye believ me not.

8:46 which of you convinceth me of sin? and if I say the truth, whi do
y not believ me?  8:47 He that is of god heareth god' words: ye
therefor hear them not, becaus ye are not of god.

8:48 then answer the jews, and said unto him, say we not well that
thou art a samaritan, and hast a devil?  8:49 jesu answered, I have
not a devil; but I honour my father, and ye do dishonour me.

8:50 and I seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and
judgeth.

8:51 verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall
nev see death.

8:52 then said the jew unto him, now we know that thou hast a devil.

abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man keep my
saying, he shall never tast of death.

8:53 art thou greater than our father abraham, which is dead? and the
prophet are dead: whom makest thou thyself?  8:54 jesu answered, if
i honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is my father that honoureth
me; of whom ye say, that he is your god: 8:55 yet ye have not known
him; but I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a
liar like unto you: but I know him, and keep hi saying.

8:56 your father abraham rejoic to see my day: and he saw it, and
wa glad.

8:57 then said the jew unto him, thou art not yet fifti year old,
and hast thou seen abraham?  8:58 jesu said unto them, verily,
verily, I say unto you, befor abraham was, I am.

8:59 then took they up stone to cast at him: but jesu hid himself,
and went out of the temple, go through the midst of them, and so
pass by.

9:1 and as jesu pass by, he saw a man which wa blind from his
birth.

9:2 and hi discipl ask him, saying, master, who did sin, this
man, or hi parents, that he wa born blind?  9:3 jesu answered,
neith hath thi man sinned, nor hi parents: but that the work of
god should be made manifest in him.

9:4 I must work the work of him that sent me, while it is day: the
night cometh, when no man can work.

9:5 As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

9:6 when he had thu spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of
th spittle, and he anoint the eye of the blind man with the clay,
9:7 and said unto him, go, wash in the pool of siloam, (which is by
interpretation, sent.) He went hi way therefore, and washed, and came
seeing.

9:8 the neighbour therefore, and they which befor had seen him that
h wa blind, said, Is not thi he that sat and begged?  9:9 some
said, thi is he: other said, He is like him: but he said, I am he.

9:10 therefor said they unto him, how were thine eye opened?  9:11
he answer and said, A man that is call jesu made clay, and
anoint mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of siloam, and
wash: and I went and washed, and I receiv sight.

9:12 then said they unto him, where is he? He said, I know not.

9:13 they brought to the pharise him that aforetim wa blind.

9:14 and it wa the sabbath day when jesu made the clay, and opened
hi eyes.

9:15 then again the pharise also ask him how he had receiv his
sight. He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed,
and do see.

9:16 therefor said some of the pharisees, thi man is not of god,
becaus he keepeth not the sabbath day. other said, how can a man
that is a sinner do such miracles? and there wa a divis among
them.

9:17 they say unto the blind man again, what sayest thou of him, that
h hath open thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet.

9:18 but the jew did not believ concern him, that he had been
blind, and receiv hi sight, until they call the parent of him
that had receiv hi sight.

9:19 and they ask them, saying, Is thi your son, who ye say was
born blind? how then doth he now see?  9:20 hi parent answer them
and said, We know that thi is our son, and that he wa born blind:
9:21 but by what mean he now seeth, we know not; or who hath opened
hi eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask him: he shall speak for
himself.

9:22 these word spake hi parents, becaus they fear the jews: for
th jew had agre already, that if ani man did confess that he was
christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.

9:23 therefor said hi parents, He is of age; ask him.

9:24 then again call they the man that wa blind, and said unto him,
giv god the praise: we know that thi man is a sinner.

9:25 He answer and said, whether he be a sinner or no, I know not:
on thing I know, that, wherea I wa blind, now I see.

9:26 then said they to him again, what did he to thee? how open he
thin eyes?  9:27 He answer them, I have told you already, and ye
did not hear: wherefor would ye hear it again? will ye also be his
disciples?  9:28 then they revil him, and said, thou art his
disciple; but we are moses' disciples.

9:29 We know that god spake unto moses: as for thi fellow, we know
not from whenc he is.

9:30 the man answer and said unto them, whi herein is a marvellous
thing, that ye know not from whenc he is, and yet he hath open mine
eyes.

9:31 now we know that god heareth not sinners: but if ani man be a
worshipp of god, and doeth hi will, him he heareth.

9:32 sinc the world began wa it not heard that ani man open the
ey of one that wa born blind.

9:33 If thi man were not of god, he could do nothing.

9:34 they answer and said unto him, thou wast altogeth born in
sins, and dost thou teach us? and they cast him out.

9:35 jesu heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found
him, he said unto him, dost thou believ on the son of god?  9:36 he
answ and said, who is he, lord, that I might believ on him?  9:37
and jesu said unto him, thou hast both seen him, and it is he that
talketh with thee.

9:38 and he said, lord, I believe. and he worship him.

9:39 and jesu said, for judgment I am come into thi world, that they
which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind.

9:40 and some of the pharise which were with him heard these words,
and said unto him, are we blind also?  9:41 jesu said unto them, if
y were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see;
therefor your sin remaineth.

10:1 verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door
into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a
thief and a robber.

10:2 but he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.

10:3 To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear hi voice: and he
calleth hi own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.

10:4 and when he putteth forth hi own sheep, he goeth befor them,
and the sheep follow him: for they know hi voice.

10:5 and a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for
they know not the voic of strangers.

10:6 thi parabl spake jesu unto them: but they understood not what
th they were which he spake unto them.

10:7 then said jesu unto them again, verily, verily, I say unto you,
i am the door of the sheep.

10:8 all that ever came befor me are thiev and robbers: but the
sheep did not hear them.

10:9 I am the door: by me if ani man enter in, he shall be saved, and
shal go in and out, and find pasture.

10:10 the thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have
it more abundantly.

10:11 I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth hi life for
th sheep.

10:12 but he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and
fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep.

10:13 the hirel fleeth, becaus he is an hireling, and careth not
for the sheep.

10:14 I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.

10:15 As the father knoweth me, even so know I the father: and I lay
down my life for the sheep.

10:16 and other sheep I have, which are not of thi fold: them also i
must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold,
and one shepherd.

10:17 therefor doth my father love me, becaus I lay down my life,
that I might take it again.

10:18 No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have
pow to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. this
command have I receiv of my father.

10:19 there wa a divis therefor again among the jew for these
sayings.

10:20 and mani of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; whi hear ye
him?  10:21 other said, these are not the word of him that hath a
devil. can a devil open the eye of the blind?  10:22 and it wa at
jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it wa winter.

10:23 and jesu walk in the templ in solomon' porch.

10:24 then came the jew round about him, and said unto him, how long
dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the christ, tell us plainly.

10:25 jesu answer them, I told you, and ye believ not: the works
that I do in my father' name, they bear wit of me.

10:26 but ye believ not, becaus ye are not of my sheep, as I said
unto you.

10:27 My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me:
10:28 and I give unto them etern life; and they shall never perish,
neith shall ani man pluck them out of my hand.

10:29 My father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man
i abl to pluck them out of my father' hand.

10:30 I and my father are one.

10:31 then the jew took up stone again to stone him.

10:32 jesu answer them, mani good work have I shew you from my
father; for which of those work do ye stone me?  10:33 the jews
answ him, saying, for a good work we stone thee not; but for
blasphemy; and becaus that thou, be a man, makest thyself god.

10:34 jesu answer them, Is it not written in your law, I said, ye
ar gods?  10:35 If he call them gods, unto whom the word of god
came, and the scriptur cannot be broken; 10:36 say ye of him, whom
th father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, thou blasphemest;
becaus I said, I am the son of god?  10:37 If I do not the work of
mi father, believ me not.

10:38 but if I do, though ye believ not me, believ the works: that
y may know, and believe, that the father is in me, and I in him.

10:39 therefor they sought again to take him: but he escap out of
their hand, 10:40 and went away again beyond jordan into the place
wher john at first baptized; and there he abode.

10:41 and mani resort unto him, and said, john did no miracle: but
al thing that john spake of thi man were true.

10:42 and mani believ on him there.

11:1 now a certain man wa sick, name lazarus, of bethany, the town
of mari and her sister martha.

11:2 (it wa that mari which anoint the lord with ointment, and
wip hi feet with her hair, whose brother lazaru wa sick.)  11:3
therefor hi sister sent unto him, saying, lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick.

11:4 when jesu heard that, he said, thi sick is not unto death,
but for the glori of god, that the son of god might be glorified
thereby.

11:5 now jesu love martha, and her sister, and lazarus.

11:6 when he had heard therefor that he wa sick, he abod two days
stil in the same place where he was.

11:7 then after that saith he to hi disciples, let us go into judaea
again.

11:8 hi discipl say unto him, master, the jew of late sought to
ston thee; and goest thou thither again?  11:9 jesu answered, are
ther not twelv hour in the day? If ani man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, becaus he seeth the light of thi world.

11:10 but if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, becaus there is
no light in him.

11:11 these thing said he: and after that he saith unto them, our
friend lazaru sleepeth; but I go, that I may awak him out of sleep.

11:12 then said hi disciples, lord, if he sleep, he shall do well.

11:13 howbeit jesu spake of hi death: but they thought that he had
spoken of take of rest in sleep.

11:14 then said jesu unto them plainly, lazaru is dead.

11:15 and I am glad for your sake that I wa not there, to the intent
y may believe; nevertheless let us go unto him.

11:16 then said thomas, which is call didymus, unto his
fellowdisciples, let us also go, that we may die with him.

11:17 then when jesu came, he found that he had lain in the grave
four day already.

11:18 now bethani wa nigh unto jerusalem, about fifteen furlong off:
11:19 and mani of the jew came to martha and mary, to comfort them
concern their brother.

11:20 then martha, as soon as she heard that jesu wa coming, went
and met him: but mari sat still in the house.

11:21 then said martha unto jesus, lord, if thou hadst been here, my
broth had not died.

11:22 but I know, that even now, whatsoev thou wilt ask of god, god
wil give it thee.

11:23 jesu saith unto her, thi brother shall rise again.

11:24 martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrect at the last day.

11:25 jesu said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he
that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: 11:26
and whosoev liveth and believeth in me shall never die. believest
th this?  11:27 she saith unto him, yea, lord: I believ that thou
art the christ, the son of god, which should come into the world.

11:28 and when she had so said, she went her way, and call mari her
sist secretly, saying, the master is come, and calleth for thee.

11:29 As soon as she heard that, she aros quickly, and came unto him.

11:30 now jesu wa not yet come into the town, but wa in that place
wher martha met him.

11:31 the jew then which were with her in the house, and comforted
her, when they saw mary, that she rose up hastili and went out,
follow her, saying, she goeth unto the grave to weep there.

11:32 then when mari wa come where jesu was, and saw him, she fell
down at hi feet, say unto him, lord, if thou hadst been here, my
broth had not died.

11:33 when jesu therefor saw her weeping, and the jew also weeping
which came with her, he groan in the spirit, and wa troubled.

11:34 and said, where have ye laid him? they said unto him, lord, come
and see.

11:35 jesu wept.

11:36 then said the jews, behold how he love him!  11:37 and some of
them said, could not thi man, which open the eye of the blind,
hav caus that even thi man should not have died?  11:38 jesus
therefor again groan in himself cometh to the grave. It wa a
cave, and a stone lay upon it.

11:39 jesu said, take ye away the stone. martha, the sister of him
that wa dead, saith unto him, lord, by thi time he stinketh: for he
hath been dead four days.

11:40 jesu saith unto her, said I not unto thee, that, if thou
wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glori of god?  11:41 then
they took away the stone from the place where the dead wa laid. and
jesu lift up hi eyes, and said, father, I thank thee that thou
hast heard me.

11:42 and I knew that thou hearest me always: but becaus of the
peopl which stand by I said it, that they may believ that thou hast
sent me.

11:43 and when he thu had spoken, he cri with a loud voice,
lazarus, come forth.

11:44 and he that wa dead came forth, bound hand and foot with
graveclothes: and hi face wa bound about with a napkin. jesu saith
unto them, loos him, and let him go.

11:45 then mani of the jew which came to mary, and had seen the
th which jesu did, believ on him.

11:46 but some of them went their way to the pharisees, and told them
what thing jesu had done.

11:47 then gather the chief priest and the pharise a council, and
said, what do we? for thi man doeth mani miracles.

11:48 If we let him thu alone, all men will believ on him: and the
roman shall come and take away both our place and nation.

11:49 and one of them, name caiaphas, be the high priest that same
year, said unto them, Ye know noth at all, 11:50 nor consid that
it is expedi for us, that one man should die for the people, and
that the whole nation perish not.

11:51 and thi spake he not of himself: but be high priest that
year, he prophesi that jesu should die for that nation; 11:52 and
not for that nation only, but that also he should gather togeth in
on the children of god that were scatter abroad.

11:53 then from that day forth they took counsel togeth for to put
him to death.

11:54 jesu therefor walk no more openli among the jews; but went
thenc unto a countri near to the wilderness, into a citi called
ephraim, and there continu with hi disciples.

11:55 and the jews' passov wa nigh at hand: and mani went out of
th countri up to jerusalem befor the passover, to purifi themselves.

11:56 then sought they for jesus, and spake among themselves, as they
stood in the temple, what think ye, that he will not come to the
feast?  11:57 now both the chief priest and the pharise had given a
commandment, that, if ani man knew where he were, he should shew it,
that they might take him.

12:1 then jesu six day befor the passov came to bethany, where
lazaru was, which had been dead, whom he rais from the dead.

12:2 there they made him a supper; and martha served: but lazaru was
on of them that sat at the tabl with him.

12:3 then took mari a pound of ointment of spikenard, veri costly, and
anoint the feet of jesus, and wipe hi feet with her hair: and the
hous wa fill with the odour of the ointment.

12:4 then saith one of hi disciples, juda iscariot, simon' son,
which should betray him, 12:5 whi wa not thi ointment sold for three
hundr pence, and given to the poor?  12:6 thi he said, not that he
car for the poor; but becaus he wa a thief, and had the bag, and
bar what wa put therein.

12:7 then said jesus, let her alone: against the day of my burying
hath she kept this.

12:8 for the poor alway ye have with you; but me ye have not always.

12:9 much peopl of the jew therefor knew that he wa there: and
they came not for jesus' sake only, but that they might see lazarus
also, whom he had rais from the dead.

12:10 but the chief priest consult that they might put lazaru also
to death; 12:11 becaus that by reason of him mani of the jew went
away, and believ on jesus.

12:12 On the next day much peopl that were come to the feast, when
they heard that jesu wa come to jerusalem, 12:13 took branch of
palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, hosanna: bless is
th king of israel that cometh in the name of the lord.

12:14 and jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is
written, 12:15 fear not, daughter of sion: behold, thi king cometh,
sit on an ass' colt.

12:16 these thing understood not hi discipl at the first: but when
jesu wa glorified, then rememb they that these thing were
written of him, and that they had done these thing unto him.

12:17 the peopl therefor that wa with him when he call lazarus
out of hi grave, and rais him from the dead, bare record.

12:18 for thi caus the peopl also met him, for that they heard that
h had done thi miracle.

12:19 the pharise therefor said among themselves, perceiv ye how
y prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.

12:20 and there were certain greek among them that came up to worship
at the feast: 12:21 the same came therefor to philip, which wa of
bethsaida of galilee, and desir him, saying, sir, we would see
jesus.

12:22 philip cometh and telleth andrew: and again andrew and philip
tel jesus.

12:23 and jesu answer them, saying, the hour is come, that the son
of man should be glorified.

12:24 verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into
th ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth
much fruit.

12:25 He that loveth hi life shall lose it; and he that hateth his
lif in thi world shall keep it unto life eternal.

12:26 If ani man serv me, let him follow me; and where I am, there
shal also my servant be: if ani man serv me, him will my father
honour.

12:27 now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? father, save me
from thi hour: but for thi caus came I unto thi hour.

12:28 father, glorifi thi name. then came there a voic from heaven,
saying, I have both glorifi it, and will glorifi it again.

12:29 the peopl therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it
thundered: other said, An angel spake to him.

12:30 jesu answer and said, thi voic came not becaus of me, but
for your sakes.

12:31 now is the judgment of thi world: now shall the princ of this
world be cast out.

12:32 and I, if I be lift up from the earth, will draw all men unto
me.

12:33 thi he said, signifi what death he should die.

12:34 the peopl answer him, We have heard out of the law that
christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, the son of man must be
lift up? who is thi son of man?  12:35 then jesu said unto them,
yet a littl while is the light with you.

walk while ye have the light, lest dark come upon you: for he that
walketh in dark knoweth not whither he goeth.

12:36 while ye have light, believ in the light, that ye may be the
children of light. these thing spake jesus, and departed, and did
hid himself from them.

12:37 but though he had done so mani miracl befor them, yet they
believ not on him: 12:38 that the say of esaia the prophet might
b fulfilled, which he spake, lord, who hath believ our report? and
to whom hath the arm of the lord been revealed?  12:39 therefor they
could not believe, becaus that esaia said again, 12:40 He hath
blind their eyes, and harden their heart; that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted,
and I should heal them.

12:41 these thing said esaias, when he saw hi glory, and spake of
him.

12:42 nevertheless among the chief ruler also mani believ on him;
but becaus of the pharise they did not confess him, lest they
should be put out of the synagogue: 12:43 for they love the prais of
men more than the prais of god.

12:44 jesu cri and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not on
me, but on him that sent me.

12:45 and he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.

12:46 I am come a light into the world, that whosoev believeth on me
should not abid in darkness.

12:47 and if ani man hear my words, and believ not, I judg him not:
for I came not to judg the world, but to save the world.

12:48 He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that
judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judg him in
th last day.

12:49 for I have not spoken of myself; but the father which sent me,
h gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.

12:50 and I know that hi command is life everlasting: whatsoever
i speak therefore, even as the father said unto me, so I speak.

13:1 now befor the feast of the passover, when jesu knew that his
hour wa come that he should depart out of thi world unto the father,
hav love hi own which were in the world, he love them unto the
end.

13:2 and supper be ended, the devil have now put into the heart
of juda iscariot, simon' son, to betray him; 13:3 jesu know that
th father had given all thing into hi hands, and that he wa come
from god, and went to god; 13:4 He riseth from supper, and laid aside
hi garments; and took a towel, and gird himself.

13:5 after that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the
disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was
girded.

13:6 then cometh he to simon peter: and peter saith unto him, lord,
dost thou wash my feet?  13:7 jesu answer and said unto him, what i
do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

13:8 peter saith unto him, thou shalt never wash my feet. jesus
answ him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.

13:9 simon peter saith unto him, lord, not my feet only, but also my
hand and my head.

13:10 jesu saith to him, He that is wash needeth not save to wash
hi feet, but is clean everi whit: and ye are clean, but not all.

13:11 for he knew who should betray him; therefor said he, Ye are not
al clean.

13:12 So after he had wash their feet, and had taken hi garments,
and wa set down again, he said unto them, know ye what I have done to
you?  13:13 Ye call me master and lord: and ye say well; for so I am.

13:14 If I then, your lord and master, have wash your feet; ye also
ought to wash one another' feet.

13:15 for I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have
don to you.

13:16 verily, verily, I say unto you, the servant is not greater than
hi lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him.

13:17 If ye know these things, happi are ye if ye do them.

13:18 I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the
scriptur may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted
up hi heel against me.

13:19 now I tell you befor it come, that, when it is come to pass, ye
may believ that I am he.

13:20 verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoev i
send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent
me.

13:21 when jesu had thu said, he wa troubl in spirit, and
testified, and said, verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you
shal betray me.

13:22 then the discipl look one on another, doubt of whom he
spake.

13:23 now there wa lean on jesus' bosom one of hi disciples, whom
jesu loved.

13:24 simon peter therefor beckon to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spake.

13:25 He then lie on jesus' breast saith unto him, lord, who is it?
13:26 jesu answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when i
hav dip it. and when he had dip the sop, he gave it to judas
iscariot, the son of simon.

13:27 and after the sop satan enter into him. then said jesu unto
him, that thou doest, do quickly.

13:28 now no man at the tabl knew for what intent he spake thi unto
him.

13:29 for some of them thought, becaus juda had the bag, that jesus
had said unto him, buy those thing that we have need of against the
feast; or, that he should give someth to the poor.

13:30 He then have receiv the sop went immedi out: and it was
night.

13:31 therefore, when he wa gone out, jesu said, now is the son of
man glorified, and god is glorifi in him.

13:32 If god be glorifi in him, god shall also glorifi him in
himself, and shall straightway glorifi him.

13:33 littl children, yet a littl while I am with you. Ye shall seek
me: and as I said unto the jews, whither I go, ye cannot come; so now
i say to you.

13:34 A new command I give unto you, that ye love one another; as
i have love you, that ye also love one another.

13:35 By thi shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
lov one to another.

13:36 simon peter said unto him, lord, whither goest thou? jesus
answ him, whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou
shalt follow me afterwards.

13:37 peter said unto him, lord, whi cannot I follow thee now? I will
lay down my life for thi sake.

13:38 jesu answer him, wilt thou lay down thi life for my sake?
verily, verily, I say unto thee, the cock shall not crow, till thou
hast deni me thrice.

14:1 let not your heart be troubled: ye believ in god, believ also
in me.

14:2 In my father' hous are mani mansions: if it were not so, i
would have told you. I go to prepar a place for you.

14:3 and if I go and prepar a place for you, I will come again, and
rec you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.

14:4 and whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.

14:5 thoma saith unto him, lord, we know not whither thou goest; and
how can we know the way?  14:6 jesu saith unto him, I am the way, the
truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the father, but by me.

14:7 If ye had known me, ye should have known my father also: and from
henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.

14:8 philip saith unto him, lord, shew us the father, and it sufficeth
us.

14:9 jesu saith unto him, have I been so long time with you, and yet
hast thou not known me, philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the
father; and how sayest thou then, shew us the father?  14:10 believest
th not that I am in the father, and the father in me?  the words
that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the father that
dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.

14:11 believ me that I am in the father, and the father in me: or
els believ me for the veri works' sake.

14:12 verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the
work that I do shall he do also; and greater work than these shall
h do; becaus I go unto my father.

14:13 and whatsoev ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the
fath may be glorifi in the son.

14:14 If ye shall ask ani thing in my name, I will do it.

14:15 If ye love me, keep my commandments.

14:16 and I will pray the father, and he shall give you another
comforter, that he may abid with you for ever; 14:17 even the spirit
of truth; whom the world cannot receive, becaus it seeth him not,
neith knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and
shal be in you.

14:18 I will not leav you comfortless: I will come to you.

14:19 yet a littl while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see
me: becaus I live, ye shall live also.

14:20 At that day ye shall know that I am in my father, and ye in me,
and I in you.

14:21 He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that
loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be love of my father, and i
wil love him, and will manifest myself to him.

14:22 juda saith unto him, not iscariot, lord, how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?  14:23 jesus
answ and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words:
and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abod with him.

14:24 He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the word which
y hear is not mine, but the father' which sent me.

14:25 these thing have I spoken unto you, be yet present with you.

14:26 but the comforter, which is the holi ghost, whom the father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things
to your remembrance, whatsoev I have said unto you.

14:27 peac I leav with you, my peac I give unto you: not as the
world giveth, give I unto you. let not your heart be troubled, neither
let it be afraid.

14:28 Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again
unto you. If ye love me, ye would rejoice, becaus I said, I go unto
th father: for my father is greater than i.

14:29 and now I have told you befor it come to pass, that, when it is
com to pass, ye might believe.

14:30 hereaft I will not talk much with you: for the princ of this
world cometh, and hath noth in me.

14:31 but that the world may know that I love the father; and as the
fath gave me commandment, even so I do. arise, let us go hence.

15:1 I am the true vine, and my father is the husbandman.

15:2 everi branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and
everi branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring
forth more fruit.

15:3 now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.

15:4 abid in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, except it abid in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide
in me.

15:5 I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and i
in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do
nothing.

15:6 If a man abid not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they
ar burned.

15:7 If ye abid in me, and my word abid in you, ye shall ask what
y will, and it shall be done unto you.

15:8 herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall
y be my disciples.

15:9 As the father hath love me, so have I love you: continu ye in
mi love.

15:10 If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abid in my love; even as i
hav kept my father' commandments, and abid in hi love.

15:11 these thing have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in
you, and that your joy might be full.

15:12 thi is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have
lov you.

15:13 greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down hi life
for hi friends.

15:14 Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoev I command you.

15:15 henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not
what hi lord doeth: but I have call you friends; for all things
that I have heard of my father I have made known unto you.

15:16 Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordain you,
that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should
remain: that whatsoev ye shall ask of the father in my name, he may
giv it you.

15:17 these thing I command you, that ye love one another.

15:18 If the world hate you, ye know that it hate me befor it hated
you.

15:19 If ye were of the world, the world would love hi own: but
becaus ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefor the world hateth you.

15:20 rememb the word that I said unto you, the servant is not
great than hi lord. If they have persecut me, they will also
persecut you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep your also.

15:21 but all these thing will they do unto you for my name' sake,
becaus they know not him that sent me.

15:22 If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin:
but now they have no cloak for their sin.

15:23 He that hateth me hateth my father also.

15:24 If I had not done among them the work which none other man did,
they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hate both me
and my father.

15:25 but thi cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfil that
i written in their law, they hate me without a cause.

15:26 but when the comfort is come, whom I will send unto you from
th father, even the spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the
father, he shall testifi of me: 15:27 and ye also shall bear witness,
becaus ye have been with me from the beginning.

16:1 these thing have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be
offended.

16:2 they shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh,
that whosoev killeth you will think that he doeth god service.

16:3 and these thing will they do unto you, becaus they have not
known the father, nor me.

16:4 but these thing have I told you, that when the time shall come,
y may rememb that I told you of them. and these thing I said not
unto you at the beginning, becaus I wa with you.

16:5 but now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh
me, whither goest thou?  16:6 but becaus I have said these things
unto you, sorrow hath fill your heart.

16:7 nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedi for you that i
go away: for if I go not away, the comfort will not come unto you;
but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

16:8 and when he is come, he will reprov the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment: 16:9 Of sin, becaus they believ not
on me; 16:10 Of righteousness, becaus I go to my father, and ye see
m no more; 16:11 Of judgment, becaus the princ of thi world is
judged.

16:12 I have yet mani thing to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now.

16:13 howbeit when he, the spirit of truth, is come, he will guid you
into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoev he
shal hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you thing to come.

16:14 He shall glorifi me: for he shall receiv of mine, and shall
shew it unto you.

16:15 all thing that the father hath are mine: therefor said I, that
h shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you.

16:16 A littl while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little
while, and ye shall see me, becaus I go to the father.

16:17 then said some of hi discipl among themselves, what is this
that he saith unto us, A littl while, and ye shall not see me: and
again, a littl while, and ye shall see me: and, becaus I go to the
father?  16:18 they said therefore, what is thi that he saith, a
littl while? we cannot tell what he saith.

16:19 now jesu knew that they were desir to ask him, and said unto
them, Do ye enquir among yourselv of that I said, A littl while,
and ye shall not see me: and again, a littl while, and ye shall see
me?  16:20 verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but
your sorrow shall be turn into joy.

16:21 A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, becaus her hour is
come: but as soon as she is deliv of the child, she remembereth no
mor the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.

16:22 and ye now therefor have sorrow: but I will see you again, and
your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.

16:23 and in that day ye shall ask me nothing. verily, verily, I say
unto you, whatsoev ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give
it you.

16:24 hitherto have ye ask noth in my name: ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full.

16:25 these thing have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time
cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall
shew you plainli of the father.

16:26 At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you,
that I will pray the father for you: 16:27 for the father himself
loveth you, becaus ye have love me, and have believ that I came
out from god.

16:28 I came forth from the father, and am come into the world: again,
i leav the world, and go to the father.

16:29 hi discipl said unto him, lo, now speakest thou plainly, and
speakest no proverb.

16:30 now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not
that ani man should ask thee: by thi we believ that thou camest
forth from god.

16:31 jesu answer them, Do ye now believe?  16:32 behold, the hour
cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, everi man to his
own, and shall leav me alone: and yet I am not alone, becaus the
fath is with me.

16:33 these thing I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have
peace.

in the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have
overcom the world.

17:1 these word spake jesus, and lift up hi eye to heaven, and
said, father, the hour is come; glorifi thi son, that thi son also may
glorifi thee: 17:2 As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that
h should give etern life to as mani as thou hast given him.

17:3 and thi is life eternal, that they might know thee the onli true
god, and jesu christ, whom thou hast sent.

17:4 I have glorifi thee on the earth: I have finish the work
which thou gavest me to do.

17:5 and now, O father, glorifi thou me with thine own self with the
glori which I had with thee befor the world was.

17:6 I have manifest thi name unto the men which thou gavest me out
of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have
kept thi word.

17:7 now they have known that all thing whatsoev thou hast given me
ar of thee.

17:8 for I have given unto them the word which thou gavest me; and
they have receiv them, and have known sure that I came out from
thee, and they have believ that thou didst send me.

17:9 I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which
thou hast given me; for they are thine.

17:10 and all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified
in them.

17:11 and now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world,
and I come to thee. holi father, keep through thine own name those
whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.

17:12 while I wa with them in the world, I kept them in thi name:
thos that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but
th son of perdition; that the scriptur might be fulfilled.

17:13 and now come I to thee; and these thing I speak in the world,
that they might have my joy fulfil in themselves.

17:14 I have given them thi word; and the world hath hate them,
becaus they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

17:15 I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but
that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.

17:16 they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

17:17 sanctifi them through thi truth: thi word is truth.

17:18 As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent
them into the world.

17:19 and for their sake I sanctifi myself, that they also might be
sanctifi through the truth.

17:20 neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall
believ on me through their word; 17:21 that they all may be one; as
thou, father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us: that the world may believ that thou hast sent me.

17:22 and the glori which thou gavest me I have given them; that they
may be one, even as we are one: 17:23 I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou
hast sent me, and hast love them, as thou hast love me.

17:24 father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with
m where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given
me: for thou lovedst me befor the foundat of the world.

17:25 O righteou father, the world hath not known thee: but I have
known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me.

17:26 and I have declar unto them thi name, and will declar it:
that the love wherewith thou hast love me may be in them, and I in
them.

18:1 when jesu had spoken these words, he went forth with his
discipl over the brook cedron, where wa a garden, into the which he
entered, and hi disciples.

18:2 and juda also, which betray him, knew the place: for jesus
ofttim resort thither with hi disciples.

18:3 juda then, have receiv a band of men and offic from the
chief priest and pharisees, cometh thither with lantern and torches
and weapons.

18:4 jesu therefore, know all thing that should come upon him,
went forth, and said unto them, whom seek ye?  18:5 they answer him,
jesu of nazareth. jesu saith unto them, I am he.

and juda also, which betray him, stood with them.

18:6 As soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went
backward, and fell to the ground.

18:7 then ask he them again, whom seek ye? and they said, jesu of
nazareth.

18:8 jesu answered, I have told you that I am he: if therefor ye
seek me, let these go their way: 18:9 that the say might be
fulfilled, which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me have I lost
none.

18:10 then simon peter have a sword drew it, and smote the high
priest' servant, and cut off hi right ear. the servant' name was
malchus.

18:11 then said jesu unto peter, put up thi sword into the sheath:
th cup which my father hath given me, shall I not drink it?  18:12
then the band and the captain and offic of the jew took jesus, and
bound him, 18:13 and led him away to anna first; for he wa father in
law to caiaphas, which wa the high priest that same year.

18:14 now caiapha wa he, which gave counsel to the jews, that it was
expedi that one man should die for the people.

18:15 and simon peter follow jesus, and so did anoth disciple:
that discipl wa known unto the high priest, and went in with jesus
into the palac of the high priest.

18:16 but peter stood at the door without. then went out that other
disciple, which wa known unto the high priest, and spake unto her
that kept the door, and brought in peter.

18:17 then saith the damsel that kept the door unto peter, art not
thou also one of thi man' disciples? He saith, I am not.

18:18 and the servant and offic stood there, who had made a fire
of coals; for it wa cold: and they warm themselves: and peter stood
with them, and warm himself.

18:19 the high priest then ask jesu of hi disciples, and of his
doctrine.

18:20 jesu answer him, I spake openli to the world; I ever taught
in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the jew alway resort;
and in secret have I said nothing.

18:21 whi askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said
unto them: behold, they know what I said.

18:22 and when he had thu spoken, one of the offic which stood by
struck jesu with the palm of hi hand, saying, answerest thou the
high priest so?  18:23 jesu answer him, If I have spoken evil, bear
wit of the evil: but if well, whi smitest thou me?  18:24 now
anna had sent him bound unto caiapha the high priest.

18:25 and simon peter stood and warm himself. they said therefore
unto him, art not thou also one of hi disciples? He deni it, and
said, I am not.

18:26 one of the servant of the high priest, be hi kinsman whose
ear peter cut off, saith, did not I see thee in the garden with him?
18:27 peter then deni again: and immedi the cock crew.

18:28 then led they jesu from caiapha unto the hall of judgment: and
it wa early; and they themselv went not into the judgment hall,
lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover.

18:29 pilat then went out unto them, and said, what accus bring
y against thi man?  18:30 they answer and said unto him, If he
wer not a malefactor, we would not have deliv him up unto thee.

18:31 then said pilat unto them, take ye him, and judg him according
to your law. the jew therefor said unto him, It is not law for us
to put ani man to death: 18:32 that the say of jesu might be
fulfilled, which he spake, signifi what death he should die.

18:33 then pilat enter into the judgment hall again, and called
jesus, and said unto him, art thou the king of the jews?  18:34 jesus
answ him, sayest thou thi thing of thyself, or did other tell it
the of me?  18:35 pilat answered, Am I a jew? thine own nation and
th chief priest have deliv thee unto me: what hast thou done?
18:36 jesu answered, My kingdom is not of thi world: if my kingdom
wer of thi world, then would my servant fight, that I should not be
deliv to the jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.

18:37 pilat therefor said unto him, art thou a king then? jesus
answered, thou sayest that I am a king. To thi end wa I born, and
for thi caus came I into the world, that I should bear wit unto
th truth. everi one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

18:38 pilat saith unto him, what is truth? and when he had said this,
h went out again unto the jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no
fault at all.

18:39 but ye have a custom, that I should releas unto you one at the
passover: will ye therefor that I releas unto you the king of the
jews?  18:40 then cri they all again, saying, not thi man, but
barabbas. now barabba wa a robber.

19:1 then pilat therefor took jesus, and scourg him.

19:2 and the soldier plat a crown of thorns, and put it on his
head, and they put on him a purpl robe, 19:3 and said, hail, king of
th jews! and they smote him with their hands.

19:4 pilat therefor went forth again, and saith unto them, behold, i
br him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.

19:5 then came jesu forth, wear the crown of thorns, and the
purpl robe. and pilat saith unto them, behold the man!  19:6 when
th chief priest therefor and offic saw him, they cri out,
saying, crucifi him, crucifi him. pilat saith unto them, take ye him,
and crucifi him: for I find no fault in him.

19:7 the jew answer him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to
die, becaus he made himself the son of god.

19:8 when pilat therefor heard that saying, he wa the more afraid;
19:9 and went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto jesus,
wh art thou? but jesu gave him no answer.

19:10 then saith pilat unto him, speakest thou not unto me? knowest
th not that I have power to crucifi thee, and have power to release
thee?  19:11 jesu answered, thou couldest have no power at all
against me, except it were given thee from above: therefor he that
deliv me unto thee hath the greater sin.

19:12 and from thenceforth pilat sought to releas him: but the jews
cri out, saying, If thou let thi man go, thou art not caesar's
friend: whosoev maketh himself a king speaketh against caesar.

19:13 when pilat therefor heard that saying, he brought jesu forth,
and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is call the
pavement, but in the hebrew, gabbatha.

19:14 and it wa the prepar of the passover, and about the sixth
hour: and he saith unto the jews, behold your king!  19:15 but they
cri out, away with him, away with him, crucifi him.

pil saith unto them, shall I crucifi your king? the chief priests
answered, We have no king but caesar.

19:16 then deliv he him therefor unto them to be crucified. and
they took jesus, and led him away.

19:17 and he bear hi cross went forth into a place call the
plac of a skull, which is call in the hebrew golgotha: 19:18 where
they crucifi him, and two other with him, on either side one, and
jesu in the midst.

19:19 and pilat wrote a title, and put it on the cross. and the
writ wa jesu OF nazareth the king OF the jews.

19:20 thi titl then read mani of the jews: for the place where jesus
wa crucifi wa nigh to the city: and it wa written in hebrew, and
greek, and latin.

19:21 then said the chief priest of the jew to pilate, write not,
th king of the jews; but that he said, I am king of the jews.

19:22 pilat answered, what I have written I have written.

19:23 then the soldiers, when they had crucifi jesus, took his
garments, and made four parts, to everi soldier a part; and also his
coat: now the coat wa without seam, woven from the top throughout.

19:24 they said therefor among themselves, let us not rend it, but
cast lot for it, whose it shall be: that the scriptur might be
fulfilled, which saith, they part my raiment among them, and for my
vestur they did cast lots. these thing therefor the soldier did.

19:25 now there stood by the cross of jesu hi mother, and his
mother' sister, mari the wife of cleophas, and mari magdalene.

19:26 when jesu therefor saw hi mother, and the discipl standing
by, whom he loved, he saith unto hi mother, woman, behold thi son!
19:27 then saith he to the disciple, behold thi mother! and from that
hour that discipl took her unto hi own home.

19:28 after this, jesu know that all thing were now accomplished,
that the scriptur might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.

19:29 now there wa set a vessel full of vinegar: and they fill a
spung with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to hi mouth.

19:30 when jesu therefor had receiv the vinegar, he said, It is
finished: and he bow hi head, and gave up the ghost.

19:31 the jew therefore, becaus it wa the preparation, that the
bodi should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that
sabbath day wa an high day,) besought pilat that their leg might be
broken, and that they might be taken away.

19:32 then came the soldiers, and brake the leg of the first, and of
th other which wa crucifi with him.

19:33 but when they came to jesus, and saw that he wa dead already,
they brake not hi legs: 19:34 but one of the soldier with a spear
pierc hi side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.

19:35 and he that saw it bare record, and hi record is true: and he
knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.

19:36 for these thing were done, that the scriptur should be
fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.

19:37 and again anoth scriptur saith, they shall look on him whom
they pierced.

19:38 and after thi joseph of arimathaea, be a discipl of jesus,
but secretli for fear of the jews, besought pilat that he might take
away the bodi of jesus: and pilat gave him leave. He came therefore,
and took the bodi of jesus.

19:39 and there came also nicodemus, which at the first came to jesus
bi night, and brought a mixtur of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred
pound weight.

19:40 then took they the bodi of jesus, and wound it in linen clothes
with the spices, as the manner of the jew is to bury.

19:41 now in the place where he wa crucifi there wa a garden; and
in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein wa never man yet laid.

19:42 there laid they jesu therefor becaus of the jews' preparation
day; for the sepulchr wa nigh at hand.

20:1 the first day of the week cometh mari magdalen early, when it
wa yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from
th sepulchre.

20:2 then she runneth, and cometh to simon peter, and to the other
disciple, whom jesu loved, and saith unto them, they have taken away
th lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid
him.

20:3 peter therefor went forth, and that other disciple, and came to
th sepulchre.

20:4 So they ran both together: and the other discipl did outrun
peter, and came first to the sepulchre.

20:5 and he stoop down, and look in, saw the linen clothes
lying; yet went he not in.

20:6 then cometh simon peter follow him, and went into the
sepulchre, and seeth the linen cloth lie, 20:7 and the napkin, that
wa about hi head, not lie with the linen clothes, but wrapped
togeth in a place by itself.

20:8 then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the
sepulchre, and he saw, and believed.

20:9 for as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again
from the dead.

20:10 then the discipl went away again unto their own home.

20:11 but mari stood without at the sepulchr weeping: and as she
wept, she stoop down, and look into the sepulchre, 20:12 and seeth
two angel in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the
feet, where the bodi of jesu had lain.

20:13 and they say unto her, woman, whi weepest thou? she saith unto
them, becaus they have taken away my lord, and I know not where they
hav laid him.

20:14 and when she had thu said, she turn herself back, and saw
jesu standing, and knew not that it wa jesus.

20:15 jesu saith unto her, woman, whi weepest thou? whom seekest
thou?  she, suppos him to be the gardener, saith unto him, sir, if
thou have born him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and i
wil take him away.

20:16 jesu saith unto her, mary. she turn herself, and saith unto
him, rabboni; which is to say, master.

20:17 jesu saith unto her, touch me not; for I am not yet ascend to
mi father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my
father, and your father; and to my god, and your god.

20:18 mari magdalen came and told the discipl that she had seen the
lord, and that he had spoken these thing unto her.

20:19 then the same day at evening, be the first day of the week,
when the door were shut where the discipl were assembl for fear
of the jews, came jesu and stood in the midst, and saith unto them,
peac be unto you.

20:20 and when he had so said, he shew unto them hi hand and his
side.

then were the discipl glad, when they saw the lord.

20:21 then said jesu to them again, peac be unto you: as my father
hath sent me, even so send I you.

20:22 and when he had said this, he breath on them, and saith unto
them, receiv ye the holi ghost: 20:23 whose soever sin ye remit,
they are remit unto them; and whose soever sin ye retain, they are
retained.

20:24 but thomas, one of the twelve, call didymus, wa not with them
when jesu came.

20:25 the other discipl therefor said unto him, We have seen the
lord.

but he said unto them, except I shall see in hi hand the print of
th nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust
mi hand into hi side, I will not believe.

20:26 and after eight day again hi discipl were within, and thomas
with them: then came jesus, the door be shut, and stood in the
midst, and said, peac be unto you.

20:27 then saith he to thomas, reach hither thi finger, and behold my
hands; and reach hither thi hand, and thrust it into my side: and be
not faithless, but believing.

20:28 and thoma answer and said unto him, My lord and my god.

20:29 jesu saith unto him, thomas, becaus thou hast seen me, thou
hast believed: bless are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed.

20:30 and mani other sign truli did jesu in the presenc of his
disciples, which are not written in thi book: 20:31 but these are
written, that ye might believ that jesu is the christ, the son of
god; and that believ ye might have life through hi name.

21:1 after these thing jesu shew himself again to the discipl at
th sea of tiberias; and on thi wise shew he himself.

21:2 there were togeth simon peter, and thoma call didymus, and
nathanael of cana in galilee, and the son of zebedee, and two other
of hi disciples.

21:3 simon peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. they say unto him,
w also go with thee. they went forth, and enter into a ship
immediately; and that night they caught nothing.

21:4 but when the morn wa now come, jesu stood on the shore: but
th discipl knew not that it wa jesus.

21:5 then jesu saith unto them, children, have ye ani meat? they
answ him, no.

21:6 and he said unto them, cast the net on the right side of the
ship, and ye shall find. they cast therefore, and now they were not
abl to draw it for the multitud of fishes.

21:7 therefor that discipl whom jesu love saith unto peter, It is
th lord. now when simon peter heard that it wa the lord, he girt his
fisher' coat unto him, (for he wa naked,) and did cast himself into
th sea.

21:8 and the other discipl came in a littl ship; (for they were not
far from land, but as it were two hundr cubits,) drag the net
with fishes.

21:9 As soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals
there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.

21:10 jesu saith unto them, bring of the fish which ye have now
caught.

21:11 simon peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great
fishes, an hundr and fifti and three: and for all there were so
many, yet wa not the net broken.

21:12 jesu saith unto them, come and dine. and none of the disciples
durst ask him, who art thou? know that it wa the lord.

21:13 jesu then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish
likewise.

21:14 thi is now the third time that jesu shew himself to his
disciples, after that he wa risen from the dead.

21:15 So when they had dined, jesu saith to simon peter, simon, son
of jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, yea,
lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, feed my lambs.

21:16 He saith to him again the second time, simon, son of jonas,
lovest thou me? He saith unto him, yea, lord; thou knowest that I love
thee. He saith unto him, feed my sheep.

21:17 He saith unto him the third time, simon, son of jonas, lovest
th me? peter wa griev becaus he said unto him the third time,
lovest thou me? and he said unto him, lord, thou knowest all things;
thou knowest that I love thee. jesu saith unto him, feed my sheep.

21:18 verily, verily, I say unto thee, when thou wast young, thou
girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou
shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thi hands, and anoth shall
gird thee, and carri thee whither thou wouldest not.

21:19 thi spake he, signifi by what death he should glorifi god.
and when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, follow me.

21:20 then peter, turn about, seeth the discipl whom jesu loved
following; which also lean on hi breast at supper, and said, lord,
which is he that betrayeth thee?  21:21 peter see him saith to
jesus, lord, and what shall thi man do?  21:22 jesu saith unto him,
if I will that he tarri till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou
me.

21:23 then went thi say abroad among the brethren, that that
discipl should not die: yet jesu said not unto him, He shall not
die; but, If I will that he tarri till I come, what is that to thee?
21:24 thi is the discipl which testifieth of these things, and wrote
thes things: and we know that hi testimoni is true.

21:25 and there are also mani other thing which jesu did, the which,
if they should be written everi one, I suppos that even the world
itself could not contain the book that should be written. amen.




th act of the apostles


1:1 the former treatis have I made, O theophilus, of all that jesus
began both to do and teach, 1:2 until the day in which he wa taken
up, after that he through the holi ghost had given command unto
th apostl whom he had chosen: 1:3 To whom also he shew himself
al after hi passion by mani infal proofs, be seen of them
forti days, and speak of the thing pertain to the kingdom of
god: 1:4 and, be assembl togeth with them, command them that
they should not depart from jerusalem, but wait for the promis of the
father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me.

1:5 for john truli baptiz with water; but ye shall be baptiz with
th holi ghost not mani day hence.

1:6 when they therefor were come together, they ask of him, saying,
lord, wilt thou at thi time restor again the kingdom to israel?  1:7
and he said unto them, It is not for you to know the time or the
seasons, which the father hath put in hi own power.

1:8 but ye shall receiv power, after that the holi ghost is come upon
you: and ye shall be wit unto me both in jerusalem, and in all
judaea, and in samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

1:9 and when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was
taken up; and a cloud receiv him out of their sight.

1:10 and while they look stedfastli toward heaven as he went up,
behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; 1:11 which also said,
y men of galilee, whi stand ye gaze up into heaven? thi same
jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
mann as ye have seen him go into heaven.

1:12 then return they unto jerusalem from the mount call olivet,
which is from jerusalem a sabbath day' journey.

1:13 and when they were come in, they went up into an upper room,
wher abod both peter, and james, and john, and andrew, philip, and
thomas, bartholomew, and matthew, jame the son of alphaeus, and simon
zelotes, and juda the brother of james.

1:14 these all continu with one accord in prayer and supplication,
with the women, and mari the mother of jesus, and with hi brethren.

1:15 and in those day peter stood up in the midst of the disciples,
and said, (the number of name togeth were about an hundr and
twenty,) 1:16 men and brethren, thi scriptur must need have been
fulfilled, which the holi ghost by the mouth of david spake before
concern judas, which wa guid to them that took jesus.

1:17 for he wa number with us, and had obtain part of this
ministry.

1:18 now thi man purchas a field with the reward of iniquity; and
fal headlong, he burst asund in the midst, and all hi bowels
gush out.

1:19 and it wa known unto all the dweller at jerusalem; insomuch as
that field is call in their proper tongue, aceldama, that is to say,
th field of blood.

1:20 for it is written in the book of psalms, let hi habit be
desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and hi bishoprick let another
take.

1:21 wherefor of these men which have compani with us all the time
that the lord jesu went in and out among us, 1:22 begin from the
bapt of john, unto that same day that he wa taken up from us, must
on be ordain to be a wit with us of hi resurrection.

1:23 and they appoint two, joseph call barsabas, who wa surnamed
justus, and matthias.

1:24 and they prayed, and said, thou, lord, which knowest the hearts
of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen, 1:25 that he
may take part of thi ministri and apostleship, from which juda by
transgress fell, that he might go to hi own place.

1:26 and they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon matthias;
and he wa number with the eleven apostles.

2:1 and when the day of pentecost wa fulli come, they were all with
on accord in one place.

2:2 and suddenli there came a sound from heaven as of a rush mighty
wind, and it fill all the hous where they were sitting.

2:3 and there appear unto them cloven tongu like as of fire, and
it sat upon each of them.

2:4 and they were all fill with the holi ghost, and began to speak
with other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance.

2:5 and there were dwell at jerusalem jews, devout men, out of
everi nation under heaven.

2:6 now when thi wa nois abroad, the multitud came together, and
wer confounded, becaus that everi man heard them speak in hi own
language.

2:7 and they were all amaz and marvelled, say one to another,
behold, are not all these which speak galilaeans?  2:8 and how hear we
everi man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?  2:9 parthians, and
medes, and elamites, and the dweller in mesopotamia, and in judaea,
and cappadocia, in pontus, and asia, 2:10 phrygia, and pamphylia, in
egypt, and in the part of libya about cyrene, and stranger of rome,
jew and proselytes, 2:11 crete and arabians, we do hear them speak
in our tongu the wonder work of god.

2:12 and they were all amazed, and were in doubt, say one to
another, what meaneth this?  2:13 other mock said, these men are
ful of new wine.

2:14 but peter, stand up with the eleven, lift up hi voice, and
said unto them, Ye men of judaea, and all ye that dwell at jerusalem,
b thi known unto you, and hearken to my words: 2:15 for these are
not drunken, as ye suppose, see it is but the third hour of the
day.

2:16 but thi is that which wa spoken by the prophet joel; 2:17 and
it shall come to pass in the last days, saith god, I will pour out of
mi spirit upon all flesh: and your son and your daughter shall
prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams: 2:18 and on my servant and on my handmaiden I will
pour out in those day of my spirit; and they shall prophesy: 2:19 and
i will shew wonder in heaven above, and sign in the earth beneath;
blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke: 2:20 the sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the moon into blood, befor the great and notable
day of the lord come: 2:21 and it shall come to pass, that whosoever
shal call on the name of the lord shall be saved.

2:22 Ye men of israel, hear these words; jesu of nazareth, a man
approv of god among you by miracl and wonder and signs, which god
did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselv also know: 2:23 him,
b deliv by the determin counsel and foreknowledg of god,
y have taken, and by wick hand have crucifi and slain: 2:24 whom
god hath rais up, have loos the pain of death: becaus it was
not possibl that he should be holden of it.

2:25 for david speaketh concern him, I foresaw the lord always
befor my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be
moved: 2:26 therefor did my heart rejoice, and my tongu wa glad;
moreov also my flesh shall rest in hope: 2:27 becaus thou wilt not
leav my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine holi one to see
corruption.

2:28 thou hast made known to me the way of life; thou shalt make me
ful of joy with thi countenance.

2:29 men and brethren, let me freeli speak unto you of the patriarch
david, that he is both dead and buried, and hi sepulchr is with us
unto thi day.

2:30 therefor be a prophet, and know that god had sworn with an
oath to him, that of the fruit of hi loins, accord to the flesh,
h would rais up christ to sit on hi throne; 2:31 He see this
befor spake of the resurrect of christ, that hi soul wa not left
in hell, neither hi flesh did see corruption.

2:32 thi jesu hath god rais up, whereof we all are witnesses.

2:33 therefor be by the right hand of god exalted, and having
receiv of the father the promis of the holi ghost, he hath shed
forth this, which ye now see and hear.

2:34 for david is not ascend into the heavens: but he saith himself,
th lord said unto my lord, sit thou on my right hand, 2:35 until i
mak thi foe thi footstool.

2:36 therefor let all the hous of israel know assuredly, that god
hath made the same jesus, whom ye have crucified, both lord and
christ.

2:37 now when they heard this, they were prick in their heart, and
said unto peter and to the rest of the apostles, men and brethren,
what shall we do?  2:38 then peter said unto them, repent, and be
bapt everi one of you in the name of jesu christ for the
remiss of sins, and ye shall receiv the gift of the holi ghost.

2:39 for the promis is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as mani as the lord our god shall call.

2:40 and with mani other word did he testifi and exhort, saying, save
yourselv from thi untoward generation.

2:41 then they that gladli receiv hi word were baptized: and the
sam day there were ad unto them about three thousand souls.

2:42 and they continu stedfastli in the apostles' doctrin and
fellowship, and in break of bread, and in prayers.

2:43 and fear came upon everi soul: and mani wonder and sign were
don by the apostles.

2:44 and all that believ were together, and had all thing common;
2:45 and sold their possess and goods, and part them to all men,
a everi man had need.

2:46 and they, continu daili with one accord in the temple, and
break bread from hous to house, did eat their meat with gladness
and singl of heart, 2:47 prais god, and have favour with all
th people. and the lord ad to the church daili such as should be
saved.

3:1 now peter and john went up togeth into the templ at the hour of
prayer, be the ninth hour.

3:2 and a certain man lame from hi mother' womb wa carried, whom
they laid daili at the gate of the templ which is call beautiful,
to ask alm of them that enter into the temple; 3:3 who see peter
and john about to go into the templ ask an alms.

3:4 and peter, fasten hi eye upon him with john, said, look on
us.

3:5 and he gave heed unto them, expect to receiv someth of
them.

3:6 then peter said, silver and gold have I none; but such as I have
g I thee: In the name of jesu christ of nazareth rise up and walk.

3:7 and he took him by the right hand, and lift him up: and
immedi hi feet and ankl bone receiv strength.

3:8 and he leap up stood, and walked, and enter with them into
th temple, walking, and leaping, and prais god.

3:9 and all the peopl saw him walk and prais god: 3:10 and they
knew that it wa he which sat for alm at the beauti gate of the
temple: and they were fill with wonder and amaz at that which
had happen unto him.

3:11 and as the lame man which wa heal held peter and john, all the
peopl ran togeth unto them in the porch that is call solomon's,
greatli wondering.

3:12 and when peter saw it, he answer unto the people, Ye men of
israel, whi marvel ye at this? or whi look ye so earnestli on us, as
though by our own power or holi we had made thi man to walk?
3:13 the god of abraham, and of isaac, and of jacob, the god of our
fathers, hath glorifi hi son jesus; whom ye deliv up, and
deni him in the presenc of pilate, when he wa determin to let
him go.

3:14 but ye deni the holi one and the just, and desir a murderer
to be grant unto you; 3:15 and kill the princ of life, whom god
hath rais from the dead; whereof we are witnesses.

3:16 and hi name through faith in hi name hath made thi man strong,
whom ye see and know: yea, the faith which is by him hath given him
thi perfect sound in the presenc of you all.

3:17 and now, brethren, I wot that through ignor ye did it, as did
also your rulers.

3:18 but those things, which god befor had shew by the mouth of all
hi prophets, that christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled.

3:19 repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sin may be
blot out, when the time of refresh shall come from the presence
of the lord.

3:20 and he shall send jesu christ, which befor wa preach unto
you: 3:21 whom the heaven must receiv until the time of restitution
of all things, which god hath spoken by the mouth of all hi holy
prophet sinc the world began.

3:22 for mose truli said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the lord
your god rais up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall
y hear in all thing whatsoev he shall say unto you.

3:23 and it shall come to pass, that everi soul, which will not hear
that prophet, shall be destroy from among the people.

3:24 yea, and all the prophet from samuel and those that follow
after, as mani as have spoken, have likewis foretold of these days.

3:25 Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the coven which
god made with our fathers, say unto abraham, and in thi seed shall
al the kindr of the earth be blessed.

3:26 unto you first god, have rais up hi son jesus, sent him to
bless you, in turn away everi one of you from hi iniquities.

4:1 and as they spake unto the people, the priests, and the captain of
th temple, and the sadducees, came upon them, 4:2 be griev that
they taught the people, and preach through jesu the resurrection
from the dead.

4:3 and they laid hand on them, and put them in hold unto the next
day: for it wa now eventide.

4:4 howbeit mani of them which heard the word believed; and the number
of the men wa about five thousand.

4:5 and it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders,
and scribes, 4:6 and anna the high priest, and caiaphas, and john,
and alexander, and as mani as were of the kindr of the high priest,
wer gather togeth at jerusalem.

4:7 and when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what
power, or by what name, have ye done this?  4:8 then peter, filled
with the holi ghost, said unto them, Ye ruler of the people, and
eld of israel, 4:9 If we thi day be examin of the good deed done
to the impot man, by what mean he is made whole; 4:10 Be it known
unto you all, and to all the peopl of israel, that by the name of
jesu christ of nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom god rais from the
dead, even by him doth thi man stand here befor you whole.

4:11 thi is the stone which wa set at nought of you builders, which
i becom the head of the corner.

4:12 neither is there salvat in ani other: for there is none other
nam under heaven given among men, wherebi we must be saved.

4:13 now when they saw the bold of peter and john, and perceived
that they were unlearn and ignor men, they marvelled; and they
took knowledg of them, that they had been with jesus.

4:14 and behold the man which wa heal stand with them, they
could say noth against it.

4:15 but when they had command them to go asid out of the council,
they confer among themselves, 4:16 saying, what shall we do to
thes men? for that inde a notabl miracl hath been done by them is
manifest to all them that dwell in jerusalem; and we cannot deni it.

4:17 but that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly
threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in thi name.

4:18 and they call them, and command them not to speak at all nor
teach in the name of jesus.

4:19 but peter and john answer and said unto them, whether it be
right in the sight of god to hearken unto you more than unto god,
judg ye.

4:20 for we cannot but speak the thing which we have seen and heard.

4:21 So when they had further threaten them, they let them go,
find noth how they might punish them, becaus of the people: for
al men glorifi god for that which wa done.

4:22 for the man wa abov forti year old, on whom thi miracl of
heal wa shewed.

4:23 and be let go, they went to their own company, and reported
al that the chief priest and elder had said unto them.

4:24 and when they heard that, they lift up their voic to god with
on accord, and said, lord, thou art god, which hast made heaven, and
earth, and the sea, and all that in them is: 4:25 who by the mouth of
thi servant david hast said, whi did the heathen rage, and the people
imagin vain things?  4:26 the king of the earth stood up, and the
rul were gather togeth against the lord, and against his
christ.

4:27 for of a truth against thi holi child jesus, whom thou hast
anointed, both herod, and pontiu pilate, with the gentiles, and the
peopl of israel, were gather together, 4:28 for to do whatsoever
thi hand and thi counsel determin befor to be done.

4:29 and now, lord, behold their threatenings: and grant unto thy
servants, that with all bold they may speak thi word, 4:30 by
stretch forth thine hand to heal; and that sign and wonder may be
don by the name of thi holi child jesus.

4:31 and when they had prayed, the place wa shaken where they were
assembl together; and they were all fill with the holi ghost, and
they spake the word of god with boldness.

4:32 and the multitud of them that believ were of one heart and of
on soul: neither said ani of them that ought of the thing which he
possess wa hi own; but they had all thing common.

4:33 and with great power gave the apostl wit of the
resurrect of the lord jesus: and great grace wa upon them all.

4:34 neither wa there ani among them that lacked: for as mani as were
possessor of land or hous sold them, and brought the price of the
th that were sold, 4:35 and laid them down at the apostles' feet:
and distribut wa made unto everi man accord as he had need.

4:36 and joses, who by the apostl wa surnam barnabas, (which is,
b interpreted, the son of consolation,) a levite, and of the
countri of cyprus, 4:37 have land, sold it, and brought the money,
and laid it at the apostles' feet.

5:1 but a certain man name ananias, with sapphira hi wife, sold a
possession, 5:2 and kept back part of the price, hi wife also being
privi to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles'
feet.

5:3 but peter said, ananias, whi hath satan fill thine heart to lie
to the holi ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?
5:4 while it remained, wa it not thine own? and after it wa sold,
wa it not in thine own power? whi hast thou conceiv thi thing in
thin heart?  thou hast not lie unto men, but unto god.

5:5 and anania hear these word fell down, and gave up the ghost:
and great fear came on all them that heard these things.

5:6 and the young men arose, wound him up, and carri him out, and
buri him.

5:7 and it wa about the space of three hour after, when hi wife,
not know what wa done, came in.

5:8 and peter answer unto her, tell me whether ye sold the land for
so much? and she said, yea, for so much.

5:9 then peter said unto her, how is it that ye have agre together
to tempt the spirit of the lord? behold, the feet of them which have
buri thi husband are at the door, and shall carri thee out.

5:10 then fell she down straightway at hi feet, and yield up the
ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, carrying
h forth, buri her by her husband.

5:11 and great fear came upon all the church, and upon as mani as
heard these things.

5:12 and by the hand of the apostl were mani sign and wonders
wrought among the people; (and they were all with one accord in
solomon' porch.

5:13 and of the rest durst no man join himself to them: but the people
magnifi them.

5:14 and believ were the more ad to the lord, multitud both of
men and women.)  5:15 insomuch that they brought forth the sick into
th streets, and laid them on bed and couches, that at the least the
shadow of peter pass by might overshadow some of them.

5:16 there came also a multitud out of the citi round about unto
jerusalem, bring sick folks, and them which were vex with unclean
spirits: and they were heal everi one.

5:17 then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him,
(which is the sect of the sadducees,) and were fill with
indignation, 5:18 and laid their hand on the apostles, and put them
in the common prison.

5:19 but the angel of the lord by night open the prison doors, and
brought them forth, and said, 5:20 go, stand and speak in the temple
to the peopl all the word of thi life.

5:21 and when they heard that, they enter into the templ earli in
th morning, and taught. but the high priest came, and they that were
with him, and call the council together, and all the senat of the
children of israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.

5:22 but when the offic came, and found them not in the prison,
they return and told, 5:23 saying, the prison truli found we shut
with all safety, and the keeper stand without befor the doors:
but when we had opened, we found no man within.

5:24 now when the high priest and the captain of the templ and the
chief priest heard these things, they doubt of them whereunto this
would grow.

5:25 then came one and told them, saying, behold, the men whom ye put
in prison are stand in the temple, and teach the people.

5:26 then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without
violence: for they fear the people, lest they should have been
stoned.

5:27 and when they had brought them, they set them befor the council:
and the high priest ask them, 5:28 saying, did not we straitly
command you that ye should not teach in thi name? and, behold, ye
hav fill jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this
man' blood upon us.

5:29 then peter and the other apostl answer and said, We ought to
obey god rather than men.

5:30 the god of our father rais up jesus, whom ye slew and hanged
on a tree.

5:31 him hath god exalt with hi right hand to be a princ and a
saviour, for to give repent to israel, and forgiv of sins.

5:32 and we are hi wit of these things; and so is also the holy
ghost, whom god hath given to them that obey him.

5:33 when they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took
counsel to slay them.

5:34 then stood there up one in the council, a pharisee, named
gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reput among all the people,
and command to put the apostl forth a littl space; 5:35 and said
unto them, Ye men of israel, take heed to yourselv what ye intend to
do as touch these men.

5:36 for befor these day rose up theudas, boast himself to be
somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined
themselves: who wa slain; and all, as mani as obey him, were
scattered, and brought to nought.

5:37 after thi man rose up juda of galile in the day of the
taxing, and drew away much peopl after him: he also perished; and
all, even as mani as obey him, were dispersed.

5:38 and now I say unto you, refrain from these men, and let them
alone: for if thi counsel or thi work be of men, it will come to
nought: 5:39 but if it be of god, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply
y be found even to fight against god.

5:40 and to him they agreed: and when they had call the apostles,
and beaten them, they command that they should not speak in the name
of jesus, and let them go.

5:41 and they depart from the presenc of the council, rejoicing
that they were count worthi to suffer shame for hi name.

5:42 and daili in the temple, and in everi house, they ceas not to
teach and preach jesu christ.

6:1 and in those days, when the number of the discipl was
multiplied, there aros a murmur of the grecian against the
hebrews, becaus their widow were neglect in the daily
ministration.

6:2 then the twelv call the multitud of the discipl unto them,
and said, It is not reason that we should leav the word of god, and
serv tables.

6:3 wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the holi ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over
thi business.

6:4 but we will give ourselv continu to prayer, and to the
ministri of the word.

6:5 and the say pleas the whole multitude: and they chose
stephen, a man full of faith and of the holi ghost, and philip, and
prochorus, and nicanor, and timon, and parmenas, and nicola a
proselyt of antioch: 6:6 whom they set befor the apostles: and when
they had prayed, they laid their hand on them.

6:7 and the word of god increased; and the number of the disciples
multipli in jerusalem greatly; and a great compani of the priests
wer obedi to the faith.

6:8 and stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonder and
miracl among the people.

6:9 then there aros certain of the synagogue, which is call the
synagogu of the libertines, and cyrenians, and alexandrians, and of
them of cilicia and of asia, disput with stephen.

6:10 and they were not abl to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which he spake.

6:11 then they suborn men, which said, We have heard him speak
blasphem word against moses, and against god.

6:12 and they stir up the people, and the elders, and the scribes,
and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the council,
6:13 and set up fals witnesses, which said, thi man ceaseth not to
speak blasphem word against thi holi place, and the law: 6:14 for
w have heard him say, that thi jesu of nazareth shall destroy this
place, and shall chang the custom which mose deliv us.

6:15 and all that sat in the council, look stedfastli on him, saw
hi face as it had been the face of an angel.

7:1 then said the high priest, are these thing so?  7:2 and he said,
men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; the god of glori appear unto
our father abraham, when he wa in mesopotamia, befor he dwelt in
charran, 7:3 and said unto him, get thee out of thi country, and from
thi kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew thee.

7:4 then came he out of the land of the chaldaeans, and dwelt in
charran: and from thence, when hi father wa dead, he remov him
into thi land, wherein ye now dwell.

7:5 and he gave him none inherit in it, no, not so much as to set
hi foot on: yet he promis that he would give it to him for a
possession, and to hi seed after him, when as yet he had no child.

7:6 and god spake on thi wise, that hi seed should sojourn in a
strang land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and
entreat them evil four hundr years.

7:7 and the nation to whom they shall be in bondag will I judge, said
god: and after that shall they come forth, and serv me in thi place.

7:8 and he gave him the coven of circumcision: and so abraham begat
isaac, and circumcis him the eighth day; and isaac begat jacob; and
jacob begat the twelv patriarchs.

7:9 and the patriarchs, move with envy, sold joseph into egypt: but
god wa with him, 7:10 and deliv him out of all hi afflictions,
and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of pharaoh king of egypt;
and he made him governor over egypt and all hi house.

7:11 now there came a dearth over all the land of egypt and chanaan,
and great affliction: and our father found no sustenance.

7:12 but when jacob heard that there wa corn in egypt, he sent out
our father first.

7:13 and at the second time joseph wa made known to hi brethren; and
joseph' kindr wa made known unto pharaoh.

7:14 then sent joseph, and call hi father jacob to him, and all his
kindred, threescor and fifteen souls.

7:15 So jacob went down into egypt, and died, he, and our fathers,
7:16 and were carri over into sychem, and laid in the sepulchr that
abraham bought for a sum of money of the son of emmor the father of
sychem.

7:17 but when the time of the promis drew nigh, which god had sworn
to abraham, the peopl grew and multipli in egypt, 7:18 till another
k arose, which knew not joseph.

7:19 the same dealt subtilli with our kindred, and evil entreat our
fathers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they
might not live.

7:20 In which time mose wa born, and wa exceed fair, and
nourish up in hi father' hous three months: 7:21 and when he was
cast out, pharaoh' daughter took him up, and nourish him for her
own son.

7:22 and mose wa learn in all the wisdom of the egyptians, and was
mighti in word and in deeds.

7:23 and when he wa full forti year old, it came into hi heart to
visit hi brethren the children of israel.

7:24 and see one of them suffer wrong, he defend him, and avenged
him that wa oppressed, and smote the egyptian: 7:25 for he supposed
hi brethren would have understood how that god by hi hand would
deliv them: but they understood not.

7:26 and the next day he shew himself unto them as they strove, and
would have set them at one again, saying, sirs, ye are brethren; why
do ye wrong one to another?  7:27 but he that did hi neighbour wrong
thrust him away, saying, who made thee a ruler and a judg over us?
7:28 wilt thou kill me, as thou diddest the egyptian yesterday?  7:29
then fled mose at thi saying, and wa a stranger in the land of
madian, where he begat two sons.

7:30 and when forti year were expired, there appear to him in the
wild of mount sina an angel of the lord in a flame of fire in a
bush.

7:31 when mose saw it, he wonder at the sight: and as he drew near
to behold it, the voic of the lord came unto him, 7:32 saying, I am
th god of thi fathers, the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and
th god of jacob. then mose trembled, and durst not behold.

7:33 then said the lord to him, put off thi shoe from thi feet: for
th place where thou standest is holi ground.

7:34 I have seen, I have seen the afflict of my peopl which is in
egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver
them. and now come, I will send thee into egypt.

7:35 thi mose whom they refused, saying, who made thee a ruler and a
judge? the same did god send to be a ruler and a deliver by the hand
of the angel which appear to him in the bush.

7:36 He brought them out, after that he had shew wonder and signs
in the land of egypt, and in the red sea, and in the wilder forty
years.

7:37 thi is that moses, which said unto the children of israel, a
prophet shall the lord your god rais up unto you of your brethren,
lik unto me; him shall ye hear.

7:38 thi is he, that wa in the church in the wilder with the
angel which spake to him in the mount sina, and with our fathers: who
receiv the live oracl to give unto us: 7:39 To whom our fathers
would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their heart turned
back again into egypt, 7:40 say unto aaron, make us god to go
befor us: for as for thi moses, which brought us out of the land of
egypt, we wot not what is becom of him.

7:41 and they made a calf in those days, and offer sacrific unto
th idol, and rejoic in the work of their own hands.

7:42 then god turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven;
a it is written in the book of the prophets, O ye hous of israel,
hav ye offer to me slain beast and sacrific by the space of
forti year in the wilderness?  7:43 yea, ye took up the tabernacl of
moloch, and the star of your god remphan, figur which ye made to
worship them: and I will carri you away beyond babylon.

7:44 our father had the tabernacl of wit in the wilderness, as
h had appointed, speak unto moses, that he should make it
accord to the fashion that he had seen.

7:45 which also our father that came after brought in with jesu into
th possess of the gentiles, whom god drave out befor the face of
our fathers, unto the day of david; 7:46 who found favour befor god,
and desir to find a tabernacl for the god of jacob.

7:47 but solomon built him an house.

7:48 howbeit the most high dwelleth not in templ made with hands; as
saith the prophet, 7:49 heaven is my throne, and earth is my
footstool: what hous will ye build me? saith the lord: or what is the
plac of my rest?  7:50 hath not my hand made all these things?  7:51
ye stiffneck and uncircumcis in heart and ears, ye do always
resist the holi ghost: as your father did, so do ye.

7:52 which of the prophet have not your father persecuted? and they
hav slain them which shew befor of the come of the just one; of
whom ye have been now the betray and murderers: 7:53 who have
receiv the law by the disposit of angels, and have not kept it.

7:54 when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and
they gnash on him with their teeth.

7:55 but he, be full of the holi ghost, look up stedfastli into
heaven, and saw the glori of god, and jesu stand on the right hand
of god, 7:56 and said, behold, I see the heaven opened, and the son
of man stand on the right hand of god.

7:57 then they cri out with a loud voice, and stop their ears,
and ran upon him with one accord, 7:58 and cast him out of the city,
and stone him: and the wit laid down their cloth at a young
man' feet, whose name wa saul.

7:59 and they stone stephen, call upon god, and saying, lord
jesus, receiv my spirit.

7:60 and he kneel down, and cri with a loud voice, lord, lay not
thi sin to their charge. and when he had said this, he fell asleep.

8:1 and saul wa consent unto hi death. and at that time there was
a great persecut against the church which wa at jerusalem; and
they were all scatter abroad throughout the region of judaea and
samaria, except the apostles.

8:2 and devout men carri stephen to hi burial, and made great
lament over him.

8:3 As for saul, he made havock of the church, enter into every
house, and hale men and women commit them to prison.

8:4 therefor they that were scatter abroad went everi where
preach the word.

8:5 then philip went down to the citi of samaria, and preach christ
unto them.

8:6 and the peopl with one accord gave heed unto those thing which
philip spake, hear and see the miracl which he did.

8:7 for unclean spirits, cri with loud voice, came out of mani that
wer possess with them: and mani taken with palsies, and that were
lame, were healed.

8:8 and there wa great joy in that city.

8:9 but there wa a certain man, call simon, which beforetim in the
sam citi use sorcery, and bewitch the peopl of samaria, giving
out that himself wa some great one: 8:10 To whom they all gave heed,
from the least to the greatest, saying, thi man is the great power of
god.

8:11 and to him they had regard, becaus that of long time he had
bewitch them with sorceries.

8:12 but when they believ philip preach the thing concern the
kingdom of god, and the name of jesu christ, they were baptized, both
men and women.

8:13 then simon himself believ also: and when he wa baptized, he
continu with philip, and wondered, behold the miracl and signs
which were done.

8:14 now when the apostl which were at jerusalem heard that samaria
had receiv the word of god, they sent unto them peter and john: 8:15
who, when they were come down, pray for them, that they might
rec the holi ghost: 8:16 (for as yet he wa fallen upon none of
them: onli they were baptiz in the name of the lord jesus.)  8:17
then laid they their hand on them, and they receiv the holi ghost.

8:18 and when simon saw that through lay on of the apostles' hands
th holi ghost wa given, he offer them money, 8:19 saying, give me
also thi power, that on whomsoev I lay hands, he may receiv the
holi ghost.

8:20 but peter said unto him, thi money perish with thee, becaus thou
hast thought that the gift of god may be purchas with money.

8:21 thou hast neither part nor lot in thi matter: for thi heart is
not right in the sight of god.

8:22 repent therefor of thi thi wickedness, and pray god, if perhaps
th thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

8:23 for I perceiv that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in
th bond of iniquity.

8:24 then answer simon, and said, pray ye to the lord for me, that
non of these thing which ye have spoken come upon me.

8:25 and they, when they had testifi and preach the word of the
lord, return to jerusalem, and preach the gospel in mani villages
of the samaritans.

8:26 and the angel of the lord spake unto philip, saying, arise, and
go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from jerusalem unto
gaza, which is desert.

8:27 and he aros and went: and, behold, a man of ethiopia, an eunuch
of great author under candac queen of the ethiopians, who had the
charg of all her treasure, and had come to jerusalem for to worship,
8:28 wa returning, and sit in hi chariot read esaia the
prophet.

8:29 then the spirit said unto philip, Go near, and join thyself to
thi chariot.

8:30 and philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet
esaias, and said, understandest thou what thou readest?  8:31 and he
said, how can I, except some man should guid me? and he desired
philip that he would come up and sit with him.

8:32 the place of the scriptur which he read wa this, He wa led as
a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb befor hi shearer, so
open he not hi mouth: 8:33 In hi humili hi judgment was
taken away: and who shall declar hi generation? for hi life is
taken from the earth.

8:34 and the eunuch answer philip, and said, I pray thee, of whom
speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?  8:35
then philip open hi mouth, and began at the same scripture, and
preach unto him jesus.

8:36 and as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water:
and the eunuch said, see, here is water; what doth hinder me to be
baptized?  8:37 and philip said, If thou believest with all thine
heart, thou mayest.

and he answer and said, I believ that jesu christ is the son of
god.

8:38 and he command the chariot to stand still: and they went down
both into the water, both philip and the eunuch; and he baptiz him.

8:39 and when they were come up out of the water, the spirit of the
lord caught away philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went
on hi way rejoicing.

8:40 but philip wa found at azotus: and pass through he preached
in all the cities, till he came to caesarea.

9:1 and saul, yet breath out threaten and slaughter against the
discipl of the lord, went unto the high priest, 9:2 and desir of
him letter to damascu to the synagogues, that if he found ani of
thi way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound
unto jerusalem.

9:3 and as he journeyed, he came near damascus: and suddenli there
shin round about him a light from heaven: 9:4 and he fell to the
earth, and heard a voic say unto him, saul, saul, whi persecutest
th me?  9:5 and he said, who art thou, lord? and the lord said, I am
jesu whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks.

9:6 and he trembl and astonish said, lord, what wilt thou have me
to do? and the lord said unto him, arise, and go into the city, and it
shal be told thee what thou must do.

9:7 and the men which journey with him stood speechless, hear a
voice, but see no man.

9:8 and saul aros from the earth; and when hi eye were opened, he
saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into
damascus.

9:9 and he wa three day without sight, and neither did eat nor
drink.

9:10 and there wa a certain discipl at damascus, name ananias; and
to him said the lord in a vision, ananias. and he said, behold, I am
here, lord.

9:11 and the lord said unto him, arise, and go into the street which
i call straight, and enquir in the hous of juda for one called
saul, of tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth, 9:12 and hath seen in a
vis a man name anania come in, and put hi hand on him,
that he might receiv hi sight.

9:13 then anania answered, lord, I have heard by mani of thi man,
how much evil he hath done to thi saint at jerusalem: 9:14 and here
h hath author from the chief priest to bind all that call on thy
name.

9:15 but the lord said unto him, Go thi way: for he is a chosen vessel
unto me, to bear my name befor the gentiles, and kings, and the
children of israel: 9:16 for I will shew him how great thing he must
suff for my name' sake.

9:17 and anania went hi way, and enter into the house; and putting
hi hand on him said, brother saul, the lord, even jesus, that
appear unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou
mightest receiv thi sight, and be fill with the holi ghost.

9:18 and immedi there fell from hi eye as it had been scales:
and he receiv sight forthwith, and arose, and wa baptized.

9:19 and when he had receiv meat, he wa strengthened. then wa saul
certain day with the discipl which were at damascus.

9:20 and straightway he preach christ in the synagogues, that he is
th son of god.

9:21 but all that heard him were amazed, and said; Is not thi he that
destroy them which call on thi name in jerusalem, and came hither
for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief
priests?  9:22 but saul increas the more in strength, and confounded
th jew which dwelt at damascus, prove that thi is veri christ.

9:23 and after that mani day were fulfilled, the jew took counsel to
kil him: 9:24 but their lay await wa known of saul. and they
watch the gate day and night to kill him.

9:25 then the discipl took him by night, and let him down by the
wal in a basket.

9:26 and when saul wa come to jerusalem, he assay to join himself
to the disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believ not
that he wa a disciple.

9:27 but barnaba took him, and brought him to the apostles, and
declar unto them how he had seen the lord in the way, and that he
had spoken to him, and how he had preach boldli at damascu in the
nam of jesus.

9:28 and he wa with them come in and go out at jerusalem.

9:29 and he spake boldli in the name of the lord jesus, and disputed
against the grecians: but they went about to slay him.

9:30 which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to caesarea,
and sent him forth to tarsus.

9:31 then had the church rest throughout all judaea and galile and
samaria, and were edified; and walk in the fear of the lord, and in
th comfort of the holi ghost, were multiplied.

9:32 and it came to pass, as peter pass throughout all quarters, he
cam down also to the saint which dwelt at lydda.

9:33 and there he found a certain man name aeneas, which had kept his
b eight years, and wa sick of the palsy.

9:34 and peter said unto him, aeneas, jesu christ maketh thee whole:
arise, and make thi bed. and he aros immediately.

9:35 and all that dwelt at lydda and saron saw him, and turn to the
lord.

9:36 now there wa at joppa a certain discipl name tabitha, which by
interpret is call dorcas: thi woman wa full of good work and
almsde which she did.

9:37 and it came to pass in those days, that she wa sick, and died:
whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber.

9:38 and forasmuch as lydda wa nigh to joppa, and the discipl had
heard that peter wa there, they sent unto him two men, desir him
that he would not delay to come to them.

9:39 then peter aros and went with them. when he wa come, they
brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widow stood by him
weeping, and shew the coat and garment which dorca made, while
sh wa with them.

9:40 but peter put them all forth, and kneel down, and prayed; and
turn him to the bodi said, tabitha, arise. and she open her eyes:
and when she saw peter, she sat up.

9:41 and he gave her hi hand, and lift her up, and when he had
cal the saint and widows, present her alive.

9:42 and it wa known throughout all joppa; and mani believ in the
lord.

9:43 and it came to pass, that he tarri mani day in joppa with one
simon a tanner.

10:1 there wa a certain man in caesarea call cornelius, a centurion
of the band call the italian band, 10:2 A devout man, and one that
fear god with all hi house, which gave much alm to the people, and
pray to god alway.

10:3 He saw in a vision evid about the ninth hour of the day an
angel of god come in to him, and say unto him, cornelius.

10:4 and when he look on him, he wa afraid, and said, what is it,
lord?  and he said unto him, thi prayer and thine alm are come up
for a memori befor god.

10:5 and now send men to joppa, and call for one simon, whose surname
i peter: 10:6 He lodgeth with one simon a tanner, whose hous is by
th sea side: he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.

10:7 and when the angel which spake unto corneliu wa departed, he
cal two of hi household servants, and a devout soldier of them
that wait on him continually; 10:8 and when he had declar all
thes thing unto them, he sent them to joppa.

10:9 On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto
th city, peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth
hour: 10:10 and he becam veri hungry, and would have eaten: but while
they made ready, he fell into a trance, 10:11 and saw heaven opened,
and a certain vessel descend upon him, as it had been a great sheet
knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth: 10:12 wherein
wer all manner of fourfoot beast of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creep things, and fowl of the air.

10:13 and there came a voic to him, rise, peter; kill, and eat.

10:14 but peter said, not so, lord; for I have never eaten ani thing
that is common or unclean.

10:15 and the voic spake unto him again the second time, what god
hath cleansed, that call not thou common.

10:16 thi wa done thrice: and the vessel wa receiv up again into
heaven.

10:17 now while peter doubt in himself what thi vision which he had
seen should mean, behold, the men which were sent from corneliu had
mad enquiri for simon' house, and stood befor the gate, 10:18 and
called, and ask whether simon, which wa surnam peter, were lodged
there.

10:19 while peter thought on the vision, the spirit said unto him,
behold, three men seek thee.

10:20 aris therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting
nothing: for I have sent them.

10:21 then peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from
cornelius; and said, behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause
wherefor ye are come?  10:22 and they said, corneliu the centurion,
a just man, and one that feareth god, and of good report among all the
nat of the jews, wa warn from god by an holi angel to send for
the into hi house, and to hear word of thee.

10:23 then call he them in, and lodg them. and on the morrow peter
w away with them, and certain brethren from joppa accompani him.

10:24 and the morrow after they enter into caesarea. and cornelius
wait for them, and he had call togeth hi kinsmen and near
friends.

10:25 and as peter wa come in, corneliu met him, and fell down at
hi feet, and worship him.

10:26 but peter took him up, saying, stand up; I myself also am a man.

10:27 and as he talk with him, he went in, and found mani that were
com together.

10:28 and he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlaw thing
for a man that is a jew to keep company, or come unto one of another
nation; but god hath shew me that I should not call ani man common
or unclean.

10:29 therefor came I unto you without gainsaying, as soon as I was
sent for: I ask therefor for what intent ye have sent for me?  10:30
and corneliu said, four day ago I wa fast until thi hour; and
at the ninth hour I pray in my house, and, behold, a man stood
befor me in bright clothing, 10:31 and said, cornelius, thi prayer is
heard, and thine alm are had in remembr in the sight of god.

10:32 send therefor to joppa, and call hither simon, whose surnam is
peter; he is lodg in the hous of one simon a tanner by the sea
side: who, when he cometh, shall speak unto thee.

10:33 immedi therefor I sent to thee; and thou hast well done
that thou art come. now therefor are we all here present befor god,
to hear all thing that are command thee of god.

10:34 then peter open hi mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive
that god is no respect of persons: 10:35 but in everi nation he that
feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accept with him.

10:36 the word which god sent unto the children of israel, preaching
peac by jesu christ: (he is lord of all:) 10:37 that word, I say, ye
know, which wa publish throughout all judaea, and began from
galilee, after the baptism which john preached; 10:38 how god anointed
jesu of nazareth with the holi ghost and with power: who went about
do good, and heal all that were oppress of the devil; for god
wa with him.

10:39 and we are wit of all thing which he did both in the land
of the jews, and in jerusalem; whom they slew and hang on a tree:
10:40 him god rais up the third day, and shew him openly; 10:41
not to all the people, but unto wit chosen befor god, even to
us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.

10:42 and he command us to preach unto the people, and to testify
that it is he which wa ordain of god to be the judg of quick and
dead.

10:43 To him give all the prophet witness, that through hi name
whosoev believeth in him shall receiv remiss of sins.

10:44 while peter yet spake these words, the holi ghost fell on all
them which heard the word.

10:45 and they of the circumcis which believ were astonished, as
mani as came with peter, becaus that on the gentil also wa poured
out the gift of the holi ghost.

10:46 for they heard them speak with tongues, and magnifi god. then
answ peter, 10:47 can ani man forbid water, that these should not
b baptized, which have receiv the holi ghost as well as we?  10:48
and he command them to be baptiz in the name of the lord. then
pray they him to tarri certain days.

11:1 and the apostl and brethren that were in judaea heard that the
gentil had also receiv the word of god.

11:2 and when peter wa come up to jerusalem, they that were of the
circumcis contend with him, 11:3 saying, thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.

11:4 but peter rehears the matter from the beginning, and expounded
it by order unto them, saying, 11:5 I wa in the citi of joppa
praying: and in a tranc I saw a vision, A certain vessel descend, as
it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by four corners; and
it came even to me: 11:6 upon the which when I had fasten mine eyes,
i considered, and saw fourfoot beast of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creep things, and fowl of the air.

11:7 and I heard a voic say unto me, arise, peter; slay and eat.

11:8 but I said, not so, lord: for noth common or unclean hath at
ani time enter into my mouth.

11:9 but the voic answer me again from heaven, what god hath
cleansed, that call not thou common.

11:10 and thi wa done three times: and all were drawn up again into
heaven.

11:11 and, behold, immedi there were three men alreadi come unto
th hous where I was, sent from caesarea unto me.

11:12 and the spirit bade me go with them, noth doubting. moreover
thes six brethren accompani me, and we enter into the man's
house: 11:13 and he shew us how he had seen an angel in hi house,
which stood and said unto him, send men to joppa, and call for simon,
whos surnam is peter; 11:14 who shall tell thee words, wherebi thou
and all thi hous shall be saved.

11:15 and as I began to speak, the holi ghost fell on them, as on us
at the beginning.

11:16 then rememb I the word of the lord, how that he said, john
inde baptiz with water; but ye shall be baptiz with the holy
ghost.

11:17 forasmuch then as god gave them the like gift as he did unto us,
who believ on the lord jesu christ; what wa I, that I could
withstand god?  11:18 when they heard these things, they held their
peace, and glorifi god, saying, then hath god also to the gentiles
gr repent unto life.

11:19 now they which were scatter abroad upon the persecut that
aros about stephen travel as far as phenice, and cyprus, and
antioch, preach the word to none but unto the jew only.

11:20 and some of them were men of cypru and cyrene, which, when they
wer come to antioch, spake unto the grecians, preach the lord
jesus.

11:21 and the hand of the lord wa with them: and a great number
believed, and turn unto the lord.

11:22 then tide of these thing came unto the ear of the church
which wa in jerusalem: and they sent forth barnabas, that he should
go as far as antioch.

11:23 who, when he came, and had seen the grace of god, wa glad, and
exhort them all, that with purpos of heart they would cleav unto
th lord.

11:24 for he wa a good man, and full of the holi ghost and of faith:
and much peopl wa ad unto the lord.

11:25 then depart barnaba to tarsus, for to seek saul: 11:26 and
when he had found him, he brought him unto antioch. and it came to
pass, that a whole year they assembl themselv with the church, and
taught much people. and the discipl were call christian first in
antioch.

11:27 and in these day came prophet from jerusalem unto antioch.

11:28 and there stood up one of them name agabus, and signifi by
th spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world:
which came to pass in the day of claudiu caesar.

11:29 then the disciples, everi man accord to hi ability,
determin to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in judaea:
11:30 which also they did, and sent it to the elder by the hand of
barnaba and saul.

12:1 now about that time herod the king stretch forth hi hand to
vex certain of the church.

12:2 and he kill jame the brother of john with the sword.

12:3 and becaus he saw it pleas the jews, he proceed further to
tak peter also. (then were the day of unleaven bread.)  12:4 and
when he had apprehend him, he put him in prison, and deliv him
to four quaternion of soldier to keep him; intend after easter to
br him forth to the people.

12:5 peter therefor wa kept in prison: but prayer wa made without
ceas of the church unto god for him.

12:6 and when herod would have brought him forth, the same night peter
wa sleep between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the
keep befor the door kept the prison.

12:7 and, behold, the angel of the lord came upon him, and a light
shin in the prison: and he smote peter on the side, and rais him
up, saying, aris up quickly. and hi chain fell off from hi hands.

12:8 and the angel said unto him, gird thyself, and bind on thy
sandals.

and so he did. and he saith unto him, cast thi garment about thee, and
follow me.

12:9 and he went out, and follow him; and wist not that it wa true
which wa done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision.

12:10 when they were past the first and the second ward, they came
unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which open to them of
hi own accord: and they went out, and pass on through one street;
and forthwith the angel depart from him.

12:11 and when peter wa come to himself, he said, now I know of a
surety, that the lord hath sent hi angel, and hath deliv me out
of the hand of herod, and from all the expect of the peopl of
th jews.

12:12 and when he had consid the thing, he came to the hous of
mari the mother of john, whose surnam wa mark; where mani were
gath togeth praying.

12:13 and as peter knock at the door of the gate, a damsel came to
hearken, name rhoda.

12:14 and when she knew peter' voice, she open not the gate for
gladness, but ran in, and told how peter stood befor the gate.

12:15 and they said unto her, thou art mad. but she constantly
affirm that it wa even so. then said they, It is hi angel.

12:16 but peter continu knocking: and when they had open the door,
and saw him, they were astonished.

12:17 but he, beckon unto them with the hand to hold their peace,
declar unto them how the lord had brought him out of the prison. and
h said, Go shew these thing unto james, and to the brethren. and he
departed, and went into anoth place.

12:18 now as soon as it wa day, there wa no small stir among the
soldiers, what wa becom of peter.

12:19 and when herod had sought for him, and found him not, he
examin the keepers, and command that they should be put to death.
and he went down from judaea to caesarea, and there abode.

12:20 and herod wa highli displeas with them of tyre and sidon: but
they came with one accord to him, and, have made blastu the king's
chamberlain their friend, desir peace; becaus their countri was
nourish by the king' country.

12:21 and upon a set day herod, array in royal apparel, sat upon his
throne, and made an orat unto them.

12:22 and the peopl gave a shout, saying, It is the voic of a god,
and not of a man.

12:23 and immedi the angel of the lord smote him, becaus he gave
not god the glory: and he wa eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.

12:24 but the word of god grew and multiplied.

12:25 and barnaba and saul return from jerusalem, when they had
fulfil their ministry, and took with them john, whose surnam was
mark.

13:1 now there were in the church that wa at antioch certain prophets
and teachers; as barnabas, and simeon that wa call niger, and
luciu of cyrene, and manaen, which had been brought up with herod the
tetrarch, and saul.

13:2 As they minist to the lord, and fasted, the holi ghost said,
separ me barnaba and saul for the work whereunto I have called
them.

13:3 and when they had fast and prayed, and laid their hand on
them, they sent them away.

13:4 So they, be sent forth by the holi ghost, depart unto
seleucia; and from thenc they sail to cyprus.

13:5 and when they were at salamis, they preach the word of god in
th synagogu of the jews: and they had also john to their minister.

13:6 and when they had gone through the isl unto paphos, they found a
certain sorcerer, a fals prophet, a jew, whose name wa barjesus:
13:7 which wa with the deputi of the country, sergiu paulus, a
prud man; who call for barnaba and saul, and desir to hear the
word of god.

13:8 but elyma the sorcer (for so is hi name by interpretation)
withstood them, seek to turn away the deputi from the faith.

13:9 then saul, (who also is call paul,) fill with the holi ghost,
set hi eye on him.

13:10 and said, O full of all subtilti and all mischief, thou child of
th devil, thou enemi of all righteousness, wilt thou not ceas to
pervert the right way of the lord?  13:11 and now, behold, the hand
of the lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not see the sun
for a season. and immedi there fell on him a mist and a darkness;
and he went about seek some to lead him by the hand.

13:12 then the deputy, when he saw what wa done, believed, being
astonish at the doctrin of the lord.

13:13 now when paul and hi compani loos from paphos, they came to
perga in pamphylia: and john depart from them return to
jerusalem.

13:14 but when they depart from perga, they came to antioch in
pisidia, and went into the synagogu on the sabbath day, and sat down.

13:15 and after the read of the law and the prophet the ruler of
th synagogu sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have
ani word of exhort for the people, say on.

13:16 then paul stood up, and beckon with hi hand said, men of
israel, and ye that fear god, give audience.

13:17 the god of thi peopl of israel chose our fathers, and exalted
th peopl when they dwelt as stranger in the land of egypt, and with
an high arm brought he them out of it.

13:18 and about the time of forti year suffer he their manner in
th wilderness.

13:19 and when he had destroy seven nation in the land of chanaan,
h divid their land to them by lot.

13:20 and after that he gave unto them judg about the space of four
hundr and fifti years, until samuel the prophet.

13:21 and afterward they desir a king: and god gave unto them saul
th son of cis, a man of the tribe of benjamin, by the space of forty
years.

13:22 and when he had remov him, he rais up unto them david to be
their king; to whom also he gave their testimony, and said, I have
found david the son of jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall
fulfil all my will.

13:23 Of thi man' seed hath god accord to hi promis rais unto
israel a saviour, jesus: 13:24 when john had first preach befor his
com the baptism of repent to all the peopl of israel.

13:25 and as john fulfil hi course, he said, whom think ye that i
am?  I am not he. but, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes
of hi feet I am not worthi to loose.

13:26 men and brethren, children of the stock of abraham, and
whosoev among you feareth god, to you is the word of thi salvation
sent.

13:27 for they that dwell at jerusalem, and their rulers, becaus they
knew him not, nor yet the voic of the prophet which are read every
sabbath day, they have fulfil them in condemn him.

13:28 and though they found no caus of death in him, yet desir they
pil that he should be slain.

13:29 and when they had fulfil all that wa written of him, they
took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre.

13:30 but god rais him from the dead: 13:31 and he wa seen many
day of them which came up with him from galile to jerusalem, who are
hi wit unto the people.

13:32 and we declar unto you glad tidings, how that the promis which
wa made unto the fathers, 13:33 god hath fulfil the same unto us
their children, in that he hath rais up jesu again; as it is also
written in the second psalm, thou art my son, thi day have I begotten
thee.

13:34 and as concern that he rais him up from the dead, now no
mor to return to corruption, he said on thi wise, I will give you
th sure merci of david.

13:35 wherefor he saith also in anoth psalm, thou shalt not suffer
thin holi one to see corruption.

13:36 for david, after he had serv hi own gener by the will of
god, fell on sleep, and wa laid unto hi fathers, and saw corruption:
13:37 but he, whom god rais again, saw no corruption.

13:38 Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through
thi man is preach unto you the forgiv of sins: 13:39 and by
him all that believ are justifi from all things, from which ye
could not be justifi by the law of moses.

13:40 bewar therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in
th prophets; 13:41 behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for
i work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe,
though a man declar it unto you.

13:42 and when the jew were gone out of the synagogue, the gentiles
besought that these word might be preach to them the next sabbath.

13:43 now when the congreg wa broken up, mani of the jew and
religi proselyt follow paul and barnabas: who, speak to
them, persuad them to continu in the grace of god.

13:44 and the next sabbath day came almost the whole citi togeth to
hear the word of god.

13:45 but when the jew saw the multitudes, they were fill with
envy, and spake against those thing which were spoken by paul,
contradict and blaspheming.

13:46 then paul and barnaba wax bold, and said, It wa necessary
that the word of god should first have been spoken to you: but seeing
y put it from you, and judg yourselv unworthi of everlast life,
lo, we turn to the gentiles.

13:47 for so hath the lord command us, saying, I have set thee to be
a light of the gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvat unto the
end of the earth.

13:48 and when the gentil heard this, they were glad, and glorified
th word of the lord: and as mani as were ordain to etern life
believed.

13:49 and the word of the lord wa publish throughout all the
region.

13:50 but the jew stir up the devout and honour women, and the
chief men of the city, and rais persecut against paul and
barnabas, and expel them out of their coasts.

13:51 but they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came
unto iconium.

13:52 and the discipl were fill with joy, and with the holi ghost.

14:1 and it came to pass in iconium, that they went both togeth into
th synagogu of the jews, and so spake, that a great multitud both
of the jew and also of the greek believed.

14:2 but the unbeliev jew stir up the gentiles, and made their
mind evil affect against the brethren.

14:3 long time therefor abod they speak boldli in the lord, which
gav testimoni unto the word of hi grace, and grant sign and
wond to be done by their hands.

14:4 but the multitud of the citi wa divided: and part held with the
jews, and part with the apostles.

14:5 and when there wa an assault made both of the gentiles, and also
of the jew with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone
them, 14:6 they were ware of it, and fled unto lystra and derbe,
c of lycaonia, and unto the region that lieth round about: 14:7
and there they preach the gospel.

14:8 and there sat a certain man at lystra, impot in hi feet,
b a crippl from hi mother' womb, who never had walked: 14:9 the
sam heard paul speak: who stedfastli behold him, and perceiving
that he had faith to be healed, 14:10 said with a loud voice, stand
upright on thi feet. and he leap and walked.

14:11 and when the peopl saw what paul had done, they lift up their
voices, say in the speech of lycaonia, the god are come down to us
in the like of men.

14:12 and they call barnabas, jupiter; and paul, mercurius, because
h wa the chief speaker.

14:13 then the priest of jupiter, which wa befor their city, brought
oxen and garland unto the gates, and would have done sacrific with
th people.

14:14 which when the apostles, barnaba and paul, heard of, they rent
their clothes, and ran in among the people, cri out, 14:15 and
saying, sirs, whi do ye these things? We also are men of like passions
with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities
unto the live god, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and
al thing that are therein: 14:16 who in time past suffer all
nat to walk in their own ways.

14:17 nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did
good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruit seasons, fill our
heart with food and gladness.

14:18 and with these say scarc restrain they the people, that
they had not done sacrific unto them.

14:19 and there came thither certain jew from antioch and iconium,
who persuad the people, and have stone paul, drew him out of the
city, suppos he had been dead.

14:20 howbeit, as the discipl stood round about him, he rose up, and
cam into the city: and the next day he depart with barnaba to
derbe.

14:21 and when they had preach the gospel to that city, and had
taught many, they return again to lystra, and to iconium, and
antioch, 14:22 confirm the soul of the disciples, and exhorting
them to continu in the faith, and that we must through much
tribul enter into the kingdom of god.

14:23 and when they had ordain them elder in everi church, and had
pray with fasting, they commend them to the lord, on whom they
believed.

14:24 and after they had pass throughout pisidia, they came to
pamphylia.

14:25 and when they had preach the word in perga, they went down
into attalia: 14:26 and thenc sail to antioch, from whenc they had
been recommend to the grace of god for the work which they
fulfilled.

14:27 and when they were come, and had gather the church together,
they rehears all that god had done with them, and how he had opened
th door of faith unto the gentiles.

14:28 and there they abod long time with the disciples.

15:1 and certain men which came down from judaea taught the brethren,
and said, except ye be circumcis after the manner of moses, ye
cannot be saved.

15:2 when therefor paul and barnaba had no small dissens and
disput with them, they determin that paul and barnabas, and
certain other of them, should go up to jerusalem unto the apostl and
eld about thi question.

15:3 and be brought on their way by the church, they pass through
phenic and samaria, declar the convers of the gentiles: and
they caus great joy unto all the brethren.

15:4 and when they were come to jerusalem, they were receiv of the
church, and of the apostl and elders, and they declar all things
that god had done with them.

15:5 but there rose up certain of the sect of the pharise which
believed, saying, that it wa need to circumcis them, and to
command them to keep the law of moses.

15:6 and the apostl and elder came togeth for to consid of this
matter.

15:7 and when there had been much disputing, peter rose up, and said
unto them, men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago god
mad choic among us, that the gentil by my mouth should hear the
word of the gospel, and believe.

15:8 and god, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, give them
th holi ghost, even as he did unto us; 15:9 and put no difference
between us and them, purifi their heart by faith.

15:10 now therefor whi tempt ye god, to put a yoke upon the neck of
th disciples, which neither our father nor we were abl to bear?
15:11 but we believ that through the grace of the lord jesu christ
w shall be saved, even as they.

15:12 then all the multitud kept silence, and gave audienc to
barnaba and paul, declar what miracl and wonder god had wrought
among the gentil by them.

15:13 and after they had held their peace, jame answered, saying, men
and brethren, hearken unto me: 15:14 simeon hath declar how god at
th first did visit the gentiles, to take out of them a peopl for his
name.

15:15 and to thi agre the word of the prophets; as it is written,
15:16 after thi I will return, and will build again the tabernacl of
david, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruin thereof,
and I will set it up: 15:17 that the residu of men might seek after
th lord, and all the gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the
lord, who doeth all these things.

15:18 known unto god are all hi work from the begin of the
world.

15:19 wherefor my sentenc is, that we troubl not them, which from
among the gentil are turn to god: 15:20 but that we write unto
them, that they abstain from pollut of idols, and from
fornication, and from thing strangled, and from blood.

15:21 for mose of old time hath in everi citi them that preach him,
b read in the synagogu everi sabbath day.

15:22 then pleas it the apostl and elder with the whole church,
to send chosen men of their own compani to antioch with paul and
barnabas; namely, juda surnam barsaba and silas, chief men among
th brethren: 15:23 and they wrote letter by them after thi manner;
th apostl and elder and brethren send greet unto the brethren
which are of the gentil in antioch and syria and cilicia.

15:24 forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us
hav troubl you with words, subvert your souls, saying, Ye must
b circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no such commandment:
15:25 It seem good unto us, be assembl with one accord, to send
chosen men unto you with our belov barnaba and paul, 15:26 men that
hav hazard their live for the name of our lord jesu christ.

15:27 We have sent therefor juda and silas, who shall also tell you
th same thing by mouth.

15:28 for it seem good to the holi ghost, and to us, to lay upon you
no greater burden than these necessari things; 15:29 that ye abstain
from meat offer to idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye
shal do well. fare ye well.

15:30 So when they were dismissed, they came to antioch: and when they
had gather the multitud together, they deliv the epistle: 15:31
which when they had read, they rejoic for the consolation.

15:32 and juda and silas, be prophet also themselves, exhorted
th brethren with mani words, and confirm them.

15:33 and after they had tarri there a space, they were let go in
peac from the brethren unto the apostles.

15:34 notwithstand it pleas sila to abid there still.

15:35 paul also and barnaba continu in antioch, teach and
preach the word of the lord, with mani other also.

15:36 and some day after paul said unto barnabas, let us go again and
visit our brethren in everi citi where we have preach the word of
th lord, and see how they do.

15:37 and barnaba determin to take with them john, whose surname
wa mark.

15:38 but paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed
from them from pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.

15:39 and the content wa so sharp between them, that they departed
asund one from the other: and so barnaba took mark, and sail unto
cyprus; 15:40 and paul chose silas, and departed, be recommend by
th brethren unto the grace of god.

15:41 and he went through syria and cilicia, confirm the churches.

16:1 then came he to derb and lystra: and, behold, a certain disciple
wa there, name timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which wa a
jewess, and believed; but hi father wa a greek: 16:2 which wa well
report of by the brethren that were at lystra and iconium.

16:3 him would paul have to go forth with him; and took and
circumcis him becaus of the jew which were in those quarters: for
they knew all that hi father wa a greek.

16:4 and as they went through the cities, they deliv them the
decre for to keep, that were ordain of the apostl and elders
which were at jerusalem.

16:5 and so were the church establish in the faith, and increased
in number daily.

16:6 now when they had gone throughout phrygia and the region of
galatia, and were forbidden of the holi ghost to preach the word in
asia, 16:7 after they were come to mysia, they assay to go into
bithynia: but the spirit suffer them not.

16:8 and they pass by mysia came down to troas.

16:9 and a vision appear to paul in the night; there stood a man of
macedonia, and pray him, saying, come over into macedonia, and help
us.

16:10 and after he had seen the vision, immedi we endeavour to
go into macedonia, assuredli gather that the lord had call us for
to preach the gospel unto them.

16:11 therefor loos from troas, we came with a straight cours to
samothracia, and the next day to neapolis; 16:12 and from thenc to
philippi, which is the chief citi of that part of macedonia, and a
colony: and we were in that citi abid certain days.

16:13 and on the sabbath we went out of the citi by a river side,
wher prayer wa wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the
women which resort thither.

16:14 and a certain woman name lydia, a seller of purple, of the city
of thyatira, which worship god, heard us: whose heart the lord
opened, that she attend unto the thing which were spoken of paul.

16:15 and when she wa baptized, and her household, she besought us,
saying, If ye have judg me to be faith to the lord, come into my
house, and abid there. and she constrain us.

16:16 and it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel
possess with a spirit of divin met us, which brought her
mast much gain by soothsaying: 16:17 the same follow paul and us,
and cried, saying, these men are the servant of the most high god,
which shew unto us the way of salvation.

16:18 and thi did she mani days. but paul, be grieved, turn and
said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of jesu christ to come
out of her.

and he came out the same hour.

16:19 and when her master saw that the hope of their gain wa gone,
they caught paul and silas, and drew them into the marketplac unto
th rulers, 16:20 and brought them to the magistrates, saying, these
men, be jews, do exceedingli troubl our city, 16:21 and teach
customs, which are not law for us to receive, neither to observe,
b romans.

16:22 and the multitud rose up togeth against them: and the
magistr rent off their clothes, and command to beat them.

16:23 and when they had laid mani stripe upon them, they cast them
into prison, charg the jailor to keep them safely: 16:24 who,
hav receiv such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and
mad their feet fast in the stocks.

16:25 and at midnight paul and sila prayed, and sang prais unto
god: and the prison heard them.

16:26 and suddenli there wa a great earthquake, so that the
found of the prison were shaken: and immedi all the doors
wer opened, and everi one' band were loosed.

16:27 and the keeper of the prison awak out of hi sleep, and
se the prison door open, he drew out hi sword, and would have
kil himself, suppos that the prison had been fled.

16:28 but paul cri with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm:
for we are all here.

16:29 then he call for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling,
and fell down befor paul and silas, 16:30 and brought them out, and
said, sirs, what must I do to be saved?  16:31 and they said, believe
on the lord jesu christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thi house.

16:32 and they spake unto him the word of the lord, and to all that
wer in hi house.

16:33 and he took them the same hour of the night, and wash their
stripes; and wa baptized, he and all his, straightway.

16:34 and when he had brought them into hi house, he set meat before
them, and rejoiced, believ in god with all hi house.

16:35 and when it wa day, the magistr sent the serjeants, saying,
let those men go.

16:36 and the keeper of the prison told thi say to paul, the
magistr have sent to let you go: now therefor depart, and go in
peace.

16:37 but paul said unto them, they have beaten us openli uncondemned,
b romans, and have cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us
out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselv and fetch us
out.

16:38 and the serjeant told these word unto the magistrates: and
they feared, when they heard that they were romans.

16:39 and they came and besought them, and brought them out, and
desir them to depart out of the city.

16:40 and they went out of the prison, and enter into the hous of
lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they comfort them, and
departed.

17:1 now when they had pass through amphipoli and apollonia, they
cam to thessalonica, where wa a synagogu of the jews: 17:2 and
paul, as hi manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days
reason with them out of the scriptures, 17:3 open and alleging,
that christ must need have suffered, and risen again from the dead;
and that thi jesus, whom I preach unto you, is christ.

17:4 and some of them believed, and consort with paul and silas; and
of the devout greek a great multitude, and of the chief women not a
few.

17:5 but the jew which believ not, move with envy, took unto them
certain lewd fellow of the baser sort, and gather a company, and
set all the citi on an uproar, and assault the hous of jason, and
sought to bring them out to the people.

17:6 and when they found them not, they drew jason and certain
brethren unto the ruler of the city, crying, these that have turned
th world upsid down are come hither also; 17:7 whom jason hath
received: and these all do contrari to the decre of caesar, saying
that there is anoth king, one jesus.

17:8 and they troubl the peopl and the ruler of the city, when
they heard these things.

17:9 and when they had taken secur of jason, and of the other, they
let them go.

17:10 and the brethren immedi sent away paul and sila by night
unto berea: who come thither went into the synagogu of the jews.

17:11 these were more nobl than those in thessalonica, in that they
receiv the word with all readi of mind, and search the
scriptur daily, whether those thing were so.

17:12 therefor mani of them believed; also of honour women which
wer greeks, and of men, not a few.

17:13 but when the jew of thessalonica had knowledg that the word of
god wa preach of paul at berea, they came thither also, and stirred
up the people.

17:14 and then immedi the brethren sent away paul to go as it
wer to the sea: but sila and timotheu abod there still.

17:15 and they that conduct paul brought him unto athens: and
receiv a command unto sila and timotheu for to come to him
with all speed, they departed.

17:16 now while paul wait for them at athens, hi spirit wa stirred
in him, when he saw the citi wholli given to idolatry.

17:17 therefor disput he in the synagogu with the jews, and with
th devout persons, and in the market daili with them that met with
him.

17:18 then certain philosoph of the epicureans, and of the stoicks,
encount him. and some said, what will thi babbler say? other
some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strang gods: becaus he
preach unto them jesus, and the resurrection.

17:19 and they took him, and brought him unto areopagus, saying, may
w know what thi new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is?  17:20 for
thou bringest certain strang thing to our ears: we would know
therefor what these thing mean.

17:21 (for all the athenian and stranger which were there spent
their time in noth else, but either to tell, or to hear some new
thing.)  17:22 then paul stood in the midst of mars' hill, and said,
y men of athens, I perceiv that in all thing ye are too
superstitious.

17:23 for as I pass by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar
with thi inscription, TO the unknown god. whom therefor ye
ignorantli worship, him declar I unto you.

17:24 god that made the world and all thing therein, see that he
i lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in templ made with hands;
17:25 neither is worship with men' hands, as though he need any
thing, see he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; 17:26
and hath made of one blood all nation of men for to dwell on all the
fac of the earth, and hath determin the time befor appointed, and
th bound of their habitation; 17:27 that they should seek the lord,
if hapli they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far
from everi one of us: 17:28 for in him we live, and move, and have our
being; as certain also of your own poet have said, for we are also
hi offspring.

17:29 forasmuch then as we are the offspr of god, we ought not to
think that the godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven
bi art and man' device.

17:30 and the time of thi ignor god wink at; but now
commandeth all men everi where to repent: 17:31 becaus he hath
appoint a day, in the which he will judg the world in righteousness
bi that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance
unto all men, in that he hath rais him from the dead.

17:32 and when they heard of the resurrect of the dead, some
mocked: and other said, We will hear thee again of thi matter.

17:33 So paul depart from among them.

17:34 howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the
which wa dionysiu the areopagite, and a woman name damaris, and
oth with them.

18:1 after these thing paul depart from athens, and came to
corinth; 18:2 and found a certain jew name aquila, born in pontus,
l come from italy, with hi wife priscilla; (becaus that
claudiu had command all jew to depart from rome:) and came unto
them.

18:3 and becaus he wa of the same craft, he abod with them, and
wrought: for by their occup they were tentmakers.

18:4 and he reason in the synagogu everi sabbath, and persuad the
jew and the greeks.

18:5 and when sila and timotheu were come from macedonia, paul was
press in the spirit, and testifi to the jew that jesu was
christ.

18:6 and when they oppos themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his
raiment, and said unto them, your blood be upon your own heads; I am
clean; from henceforth I will go unto the gentiles.

18:7 and he depart thence, and enter into a certain man' house,
nam justus, one that worship god, whose hous join hard to the
synagogue.

18:8 and crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believ on the
lord with all hi house; and mani of the corinthian hear believed,
and were baptized.

18:9 then spake the lord to paul in the night by a vision, Be not
afraid, but speak, and hold not thi peace: 18:10 for I am with thee,
and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: for I have much peopl in
thi city.

18:11 and he continu there a year and six months, teach the word
of god among them.

18:12 and when gallio wa the deputi of achaia, the jew made
insurrect with one accord against paul, and brought him to the
judg seat, 18:13 saying, thi fellow persuadeth men to worship god
contrari to the law.

18:14 and when paul wa now about to open hi mouth, gallio said unto
th jews, If it were a matter of wrong or wick lewdness, O ye jews,
reason would that I should bear with you: 18:15 but if it be a
quest of word and names, and of your law, look ye to it; for i
wil be no judg of such matters.

18:16 and he drave them from the judgment seat.

18:17 then all the greek took sosthenes, the chief ruler of the
synagogue, and beat him befor the judgment seat. and gallio care for
non of those things.

18:18 and paul after thi tarri there yet a good while, and then
took hi leav of the brethren, and sail thenc into syria, and with
him priscilla and aquila; have shorn hi head in cenchrea: for he
had a vow.

18:19 and he came to ephesus, and left them there: but he himself
ent into the synagogue, and reason with the jews.

18:20 when they desir him to tarri longer time with them, he
cons not; 18:21 but bade them farewell, saying, I must by all
mean keep thi feast that cometh in jerusalem: but I will return
again unto you, if god will. and he sail from ephesus.

18:22 and when he had land at caesarea, and gone up, and salut the
church, he went down to antioch.

18:23 and after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went
ov all the countri of galatia and phrygia in order, strengthening
al the disciples.

18:24 and a certain jew name apollos, born at alexandria, an eloquent
man, and mighti in the scriptures, came to ephesus.

18:25 thi man wa instruct in the way of the lord; and being
ferv in the spirit, he spake and taught dilig the thing of
th lord, know onli the baptism of john.

18:26 and he began to speak boldli in the synagogue: whom when aquila
and priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expound unto
him the way of god more perfectly.

18:27 and when he wa dispos to pass into achaia, the brethren
wrote, exhort the discipl to receiv him: who, when he wa come,
help them much which had believ through grace: 18:28 for he
mightili convinc the jews, and that publickly, shew by the
scriptur that jesu wa christ.

19:1 and it came to pass, that, while apollo wa at corinth, paul
hav pass through the upper coast came to ephesus: and finding
certain disciples, 19:2 He said unto them, have ye receiv the holy
ghost sinc ye believed?  and they said unto him, We have not so much
a heard whether there be ani holi ghost.

19:3 and he said unto them, unto what then were ye baptized? and they
said, unto john' baptism.

19:4 then said paul, john verili baptiz with the baptism of
repentance, say unto the people, that they should believ on him
which should come after him, that is, on christ jesus.

19:5 when they heard this, they were baptiz in the name of the lord
jesus.

19:6 and when paul had laid hi hand upon them, the holi ghost came
on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.

19:7 and all the men were about twelve.

19:8 and he went into the synagogue, and spake boldli for the space of
thre months, disput and persuad the thing concern the
kingdom of god.

19:9 but when diver were hardened, and believ not, but spake evil
of that way befor the multitude, he depart from them, and separated
th disciples, disput daili in the school of one tyrannus.

19:10 and thi continu by the space of two years; so that all they
which dwelt in asia heard the word of the lord jesus, both jew and
greeks.

19:11 and god wrought special miracl by the hand of paul: 19:12 so
that from hi bodi were brought unto the sick handkerchief or aprons,
and the diseas depart from them, and the evil spirit went out of
them.

19:13 then certain of the vagabond jews, exorcists, took upon them to
cal over them which had evil spirit the name of the lord jesus,
saying, We adjur you by jesu whom paul preacheth.

19:14 and there were seven son of one sceva, a jew, and chief of the
priests, which did so.

19:15 and the evil spirit answer and said, jesu I know, and paul i
know; but who are ye?  19:16 and the man in whom the evil spirit was
leap on them, and overcam them, and prevail against them, so that
they fled out of that hous nake and wounded.

19:17 and thi wa known to all the jew and greek also dwell at
ephesus; and fear fell on them all, and the name of the lord jesu was
magnified.

19:18 and mani that believ came, and confessed, and shew their
deeds.

19:19 mani of them also which use curiou art brought their books
together, and burn them befor all men: and they count the price
of them, and found it fifti thousand piec of silver.

19:20 So mightili grew the word of god and prevailed.

19:21 after these thing were ended, paul purpos in the spirit, when
h had pass through macedonia and achaia, to go to jerusalem,
saying, after I have been there, I must also see rome.

19:22 So he sent into macedonia two of them that minist unto him,
timotheu and erastus; but he himself stay in asia for a season.

19:23 and the same time there aros no small stir about that way.

19:24 for a certain man name demetrius, a silversmith, which made
silv shrine for diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen;
19:25 whom he call togeth with the workmen of like occupation, and
said, sirs, ye know that by thi craft we have our wealth.

19:26 moreov ye see and hear, that not alon at ephesus, but almost
throughout all asia, thi paul hath persuad and turn away much
people, say that they be no gods, which are made with hands: 19:27
so that not onli thi our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but
also that the templ of the great goddess diana should be despised,
and her magnific should be destroyed, whom all asia and the world
worshippeth.

19:28 and when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and
cri out, saying, great is diana of the ephesians.

19:29 and the whole citi wa fill with confusion: and have caught
gaiu and aristarchus, men of macedonia, paul' companion in travel,
they rush with one accord into the theatre.

19:30 and when paul would have enter in unto the people, the
discipl suffer him not.

19:31 and certain of the chief of asia, which were hi friends, sent
unto him, desir him that he would not adventur himself into the
theatre.

19:32 some therefor cri one thing, and some another: for the
assembl wa confused: and the more part knew not wherefor they were
com together.

19:33 and they drew alexand out of the multitude, the jew putting
him forward. and alexand beckon with the hand, and would have made
hi defenc unto the people.

19:34 but when they knew that he wa a jew, all with one voic about
th space of two hour cri out, great is diana of the ephesians.

19:35 and when the townclerk had appeas the people, he said, Ye men
of ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the citi of
th ephesian is a worshipp of the great goddess diana, and of the
imag which fell down from jupiter?  19:36 see then that these
th cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do
noth rashly.

19:37 for ye have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers
of churches, nor yet blasphem of your goddess.

19:38 wherefor if demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him,
hav a matter against ani man, the law is open, and there are
deputies: let them implead one another.

19:39 but if ye enquir ani thing concern other matters, it shall
b determin in a law assembly.

19:40 for we are in danger to be call in question for thi day's
uproar, there be no caus wherebi we may give an account of this
concourse.

19:41 and when he had thu spoken, he dismiss the assembly.

20:1 and after the uproar wa ceased, paul call unto him the
disciples, and embrac them, and depart for to go into macedonia.

20:2 and when he had gone over those parts, and had given them much
exhortation, he came into greece, 20:3 and there abod three months.
and when the jew laid wait for him, as he wa about to sail into
syria, he purpos to return through macedonia.

20:4 and there accompani him into asia sopat of berea; and of the
thessalonians, aristarchu and secundus; and gaiu of derbe, and
timotheus; and of asia, tychicu and trophimus.

20:5 these go befor tarri for us at troas.

20:6 and we sail away from philippi after the day of unleavened
bread, and came unto them to troa in five days; where we abod seven
days.

20:7 and upon the first day of the week, when the discipl came
togeth to break bread, paul preach unto them, readi to depart on
th morrow; and continu hi speech until midnight.

20:8 and there were mani light in the upper chamber, where they were
gath together.

20:9 and there sat in a window a certain young man name eutychus,
b fallen into a deep sleep: and as paul wa long preaching, he
sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and wa taken
up dead.

20:10 and paul went down, and fell on him, and embrac him said,
troubl not yourselves; for hi life is in him.

20:11 when he therefor wa come up again, and had broken bread, and
eaten, and talk a long while, even till break of day, so he
departed.

20:12 and they brought the young man alive, and were not a little
comforted.

20:13 and we went befor to ship, and sail unto assos, there
intend to take in paul: for so had he appointed, mind himself to
go afoot.

20:14 and when he met with us at assos, we took him in, and came to
mitylene.

20:15 and we sail thence, and came the next day over against chios;
and the next day we arriv at samos, and tarri at trogyllium; and
th next day we came to miletus.

20:16 for paul had determin to sail by ephesus, becaus he would not
spend the time in asia: for he hasted, if it were possibl for him, to
b at jerusalem the day of pentecost.

20:17 and from miletu he sent to ephesus, and call the elder of
th church.

20:18 and when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from
th first day that I came into asia, after what manner I have been
with you at all seasons, 20:19 serv the lord with all humil of
mind, and with mani tears, and temptations, which befel me by the
li in wait of the jews: 20:20 and how I kept back noth that was
profit unto you, but have shew you, and have taught you
publickly, and from hous to house, 20:21 testifi both to the jews,
and also to the greeks, repent toward god, and faith toward our
lord jesu christ.

20:22 and now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto jerusalem, not
know the thing that shall befal me there: 20:23 save that the
holi ghost witnesseth in everi city, say that bond and afflictions
abid me.

20:24 but none of these thing move me, neither count I my life dear
unto myself, so that I might finish my cours with joy, and the
ministry, which I have receiv of the lord jesus, to testifi the
gospel of the grace of god.

20:25 and now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone
preach the kingdom of god, shall see my face no more.

20:26 wherefor I take you to record thi day, that I am pure from the
blood of all men.

20:27 for I have not shun to declar unto you all the counsel of
god.

20:28 take heed therefor unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over
th which the holi ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church
of god, which he hath purchas with hi own blood.

20:29 for I know this, that after my depart shall grievou wolves
ent in among you, not spare the flock.

20:30 also of your own selv shall men arise, speak perverse
things, to draw away discipl after them.

20:31 therefor watch, and remember, that by the space of three years
i ceas not to warn everi one night and day with tears.

20:32 and now, brethren, I commend you to god, and to the word of his
grace, which is abl to build you up, and to give you an inheritance
among all them which are sanctified.

20:33 I have covet no man' silver, or gold, or apparel.

20:34 yea, ye yourselv know, that these hand have minist unto
mi necessities, and to them that were with me.

20:35 I have shew you all things, how that so labour ye ought to
support the weak, and to rememb the word of the lord jesus, how he
said, It is more bless to give than to receive.

20:36 and when he had thu spoken, he kneel down, and pray with
them all.

20:37 and they all wept sore, and fell on paul' neck, and kiss him,
20:38 sorrow most of all for the word which he spake, that they
should see hi face no more. and they accompani him unto the ship.

21:1 and it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had
launched, we came with a straight cours unto coos, and the day
follow unto rhodes, and from thenc unto patara: 21:2 and find a
ship sail over unto phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.

21:3 now when we had discov cyprus, we left it on the left hand,
and sail into syria, and land at tyre: for there the ship wa to
unlad her burden.

21:4 and find disciples, we tarri there seven days: who said to
paul through the spirit, that he should not go up to jerusalem.

21:5 and when we had accomplish those days, we depart and went our
way; and they all brought us on our way, with wive and children, till
w were out of the city: and we kneel down on the shore, and prayed.

21:6 and when we had taken our leav one of another, we took ship; and
they return home again.

21:7 and when we had finish our cours from tyre, we came to
ptolemais, and salut the brethren, and abod with them one day.

21:8 and the next day we that were of paul' compani departed, and
cam unto caesarea: and we enter into the hous of philip the
evangelist, which wa one of the seven; and abod with him.

21:9 and the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.

21:10 and as we tarri there mani days, there came down from judaea a
certain prophet, name agabus.

21:11 and when he wa come unto us, he took paul' girdle, and bound
hi own hand and feet, and said, thu saith the holi ghost, So shall
th jew at jerusalem bind the man that owneth thi girdle, and shall
deliv him into the hand of the gentiles.

21:12 and when we heard these things, both we, and they of that place,
besought him not to go up to jerusalem.

21:13 then paul answered, what mean ye to weep and to break mine
heart?  for I am readi not to be bound only, but also to die at
jerusalem for the name of the lord jesus.

21:14 and when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, the will
of the lord be done.

21:15 and after those day we took up our carriages, and went up to
jerusalem.

21:16 there went with us also certain of the discipl of caesarea,
and brought with them one mnason of cyprus, an old disciple, with whom
w should lodge.

21:17 and when we were come to jerusalem, the brethren receiv us
gladly.

21:18 and the day follow paul went in with us unto james; and all
th elder were present.

21:19 and when he had salut them, he declar particularli what
th god had wrought among the gentil by hi ministry.

21:20 and when they heard it, they glorifi the lord, and said unto
him, thou seest, brother, how mani thousand of jew there are which
believe; and they are all zealou of the law: 21:21 and they are
inform of thee, that thou teachest all the jew which are among the
gentil to forsak moses, say that they ought not to circumcise
their children, neither to walk after the customs.

21:22 what is it therefore? the multitud must need come together:
for they will hear that thou art come.

21:23 Do therefor thi that we say to thee: We have four men which
hav a vow on them; 21:24 them take, and purifi thyself with them, and
b at charg with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may
know that those things, whereof they were inform concern thee,
ar nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest
th law.

21:25 As touch the gentil which believe, we have written and
conclud that they observ no such thing, save onli that they keep
themselv from thing offer to idols, and from blood, and from
strangled, and from fornication.

21:26 then paul took the men, and the next day purifi himself with
them enter into the temple, to signifi the accomplish of the
day of purification, until that an offer should be offer for
everi one of them.

21:27 and when the seven day were almost ended, the jew which were
of asia, when they saw him in the temple, stir up all the people,
and laid hand on him, 21:28 cri out, men of israel, help: thi is
th man, that teacheth all men everi where against the people, and the
law, and thi place: and further brought greek also into the temple,
and hath pollut thi holi place.

21:29 (for they had seen befor with him in the citi trophimu an
ephesian, whom they suppos that paul had brought into the temple.)
21:30 and all the citi wa moved, and the peopl ran together: and
they took paul, and drew him out of the temple: and forthwith the
door were shut.

21:31 and as they went about to kill him, tide came unto the chief
captain of the band, that all jerusalem wa in an uproar.

21:32 who immedi took soldier and centurions, and ran down unto
them: and when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, they left
beat of paul.

21:33 then the chief captain came near, and took him, and commanded
him to be bound with two chains; and demand who he was, and what he
had done.

21:34 and some cri one thing, some another, among the multitude: and
when he could not know the certainti for the tumult, he command him
to be carri into the castle.

21:35 and when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he wa borne
of the soldier for the violenc of the people.

21:36 for the multitud of the peopl follow after, crying, away
with him.

21:37 and as paul wa to be led into the castle, he said unto the
chief captain, may I speak unto thee? who said, canst thou speak
greek?  21:38 art not thou that egyptian, which befor these days
madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilder four thousand
men that were murderers?  21:39 but paul said, I am a man which am a
jew of tarsus, a citi in cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and, i
beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people.

21:40 and when he had given him licence, paul stood on the stairs, and
beckon with the hand unto the people. and when there wa made a
great silence, he spake unto them in the hebrew tongue, saying, 22:1
men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defenc which I make now unto
you.

22:2 (and when they heard that he spake in the hebrew tongu to them,
they kept the more silence: and he saith,) 22:3 I am verili a man
which am a jew, born in tarsus, a citi in cilicia, yet brought up in
thi citi at the feet of gamaliel, and taught accord to the perfect
mann of the law of the fathers, and wa zealou toward god, as ye
al are thi day.

22:4 and I persecut thi way unto the death, bind and delivering
into prison both men and women.

22:5 As also the high priest doth bear me witness, and all the estate
of the elders: from whom also I receiv letter unto the brethren,
and went to damascus, to bring them which were there bound unto
jerusalem, for to be punished.

22:6 and it came to pass, that, as I made my journey, and wa come
nigh unto damascu about noon, suddenli there shone from heaven a
great light round about me.

22:7 and I fell unto the ground, and heard a voic say unto me,
saul, saul, whi persecutest thou me?  22:8 and I answered, who art
thou, lord? and he said unto me, I am jesu of nazareth, whom thou
persecutest.

22:9 and they that were with me saw inde the light, and were afraid;
but they heard not the voic of him that spake to me.

22:10 and I said, what shall I do, lord? and the lord said unto me,
arise, and go into damascus; and there it shall be told thee of all
th which are appoint for thee to do.

22:11 and when I could not see for the glori of that light, be led
bi the hand of them that were with me, I came into damascus.

22:12 and one ananias, a devout man accord to the law, have a
good report of all the jew which dwelt there, 22:13 came unto me, and
stood, and said unto me, brother saul, receiv thi sight. and the same
hour I look up upon him.

22:14 and he said, the god of our father hath chosen thee, that thou
shouldest know hi will, and see that just one, and shouldest hear the
voic of hi mouth.

22:15 for thou shalt be hi wit unto all men of what thou hast
seen and heard.

22:16 and now whi tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away
thi sins, call on the name of the lord.

22:17 and it came to pass, that, when I wa come again to jerusalem,
even while I pray in the temple, I wa in a trance; 22:18 and saw
him say unto me, make haste, and get thee quickli out of jerusalem:
for they will not receiv thi testimoni concern me.

22:19 and I said, lord, they know that I imprison and beat in every
synagogu them that believ on thee: 22:20 and when the blood of thy
martyr stephen wa shed, I also wa stand by, and consent unto
hi death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.

22:21 and he said unto me, depart: for I will send thee far henc unto
th gentiles.

22:22 and they gave him audienc unto thi word, and then lift up
their voices, and said, away with such a fellow from the earth: for it
i not fit that he should live.

22:23 and as they cri out, and cast off their clothes, and threw
dust into the air, 22:24 the chief captain command him to be brought
into the castle, and bade that he should be examin by scourging;
that he might know wherefor they cri so against him.

22:25 and as they bound him with thongs, paul said unto the centurion
that stood by, Is it law for you to scourg a man that is a roman,
and uncondemned?  22:26 when the centurion heard that, he went and
told the chief captain, saying, take heed what thou doest: for this
man is a roman.

22:27 then the chief captain came, and said unto him, tell me, art
thou a roman? He said, yea.

22:28 and the chief captain answered, with a great sum obtain I this
freedom. and paul said, but I wa free born.

22:29 then straightway they depart from him which should have
examin him: and the chief captain also wa afraid, after he knew
that he wa a roman, and becaus he had bound him.

22:30 On the morrow, becaus he would have known the certainty
wherefor he wa accus of the jews, he loos him from hi bands,
and command the chief priest and all their council to appear, and
brought paul down, and set him befor them.

23:1 and paul, earnestli behold the council, said, men and
brethren, I have live in all good conscienc befor god until this
day.

23:2 and the high priest anania command them that stood by him to
smit him on the mouth.

23:3 then said paul unto him, god shall smite thee, thou white wall:
for sittest thou to judg me after the law, and commandest me to be
smitten contrari to the law?  23:4 and they that stood by said,
revilest thou god' high priest?  23:5 then said paul, I wist not,
brethren, that he wa the high priest: for it is written, thou shalt
not speak evil of the ruler of thi people.

23:6 but when paul perceiv that the one part were sadducees, and the
oth pharisees, he cri out in the council, men and brethren, I am a
pharisee, the son of a pharisee: of the hope and resurrect of the
dead I am call in question.

23:7 and when he had so said, there aros a dissens between the
pharise and the sadducees: and the multitud wa divided.

23:8 for the sadduce say that there is no resurrection, neither
angel, nor spirit: but the pharise confess both.

23:9 and there aros a great cry: and the scribe that were of the
pharisees' part arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil in this
man: but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight
against god.

23:10 and when there aros a great dissension, the chief captain,
fear lest paul should have been pull in piec of them, commanded
th soldier to go down, and to take him by forc from among them, and
to bring him into the castle.

23:11 and the night follow the lord stood by him, and said, Be of
good cheer, paul: for as thou hast testifi of me in jerusalem, so
must thou bear wit also at rome.

23:12 and when it wa day, certain of the jew band together, and
bound themselv under a curse, say that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had kill paul.

23:13 and they were more than forti which had made thi conspiracy.

23:14 and they came to the chief priest and elders, and said, We have
bound ourselv under a great curse, that we will eat noth until we
hav slain paul.

23:15 now therefor ye with the council signifi to the chief captain
that he bring him down unto you to morrow, as though ye would enquire
someth more perfectli concern him: and we, or ever he come near,
ar readi to kill him.

23:16 and when paul' sister' son heard of their lie in wait, he
went and enter into the castle, and told paul.

23:17 then paul call one of the centurion unto him, and said, bring
thi young man unto the chief captain: for he hath a certain thing to
tel him.

23:18 So he took him, and brought him to the chief captain, and said,
paul the prison call me unto him, and pray me to bring this
young man unto thee, who hath someth to say unto thee.

23:19 then the chief captain took him by the hand, and went with him
asid privately, and ask him, what is that thou hast to tell me?
23:20 and he said, the jew have agre to desir thee that thou
wouldest bring down paul to morrow into the council, as though they
would enquir somewhat of him more perfectly.

23:21 but do not thou yield unto them: for there lie in wait for him
of them more than forti men, which have bound themselv with an oath,
that they will neither eat nor drink till they have kill him: and
now are they ready, look for a promis from thee.

23:22 So the chief captain then let the young man depart, and charged
him, see thou tell no man that thou hast shew these thing to me.

23:23 and he call unto him two centurions, saying, make readi two
hundr soldier to go to caesarea, and horsemen threescor and ten,
and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night; 23:24 and
provid them beasts, that they may set paul on, and bring him safe
unto felix the governor.

23:25 and he wrote a letter after thi manner: 23:26 claudiu lysias
unto the most excel governor felix sendeth greeting.

23:27 thi man wa taken of the jews, and should have been kill of
them: then came I with an army, and rescu him, have understood
that he wa a roman.

23:28 and when I would have known the caus wherefor they accused
him, I brought him forth into their council: 23:29 whom I perceiv to
b accus of question of their law, but to have noth laid to his
charg worthi of death or of bonds.

23:30 and when it wa told me how that the jew laid wait for the man,
i sent straightway to thee, and gave command to hi accus also
to say befor thee what they had against him. farewell.

23:31 then the soldiers, as it wa command them, took paul, and
brought him by night to antipatris.

23:32 On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and
return to the castle: 23:33 who, when they came to caesarea and
deliv the epistl to the governor, present paul also befor him.

23:34 and when the governor had read the letter, he ask of what
provinc he was. and when he understood that he wa of cilicia; 23:35
i will hear thee, said he, when thine accus are also come. and he
command him to be kept in herod' judgment hall.

24:1 and after five day anania the high priest descend with the
elders, and with a certain orat name tertullus, who inform the
governor against paul.

24:2 and when he wa call forth, tertullu began to accus him,
saying, see that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very
worthi deed are done unto thi nation by thi providence, 24:3 we
accept it always, and in all places, most nobl felix, with all
thankfulness.

24:4 notwithstanding, that I be not further tediou unto thee, I pray
the that thou wouldest hear us of thi clemenc a few words.

24:5 for we have found thi man a pestil fellow, and a mover of
sedit among all the jew throughout the world, and a ringlead of
th sect of the nazarenes: 24:6 who also hath gone about to profane
th temple: whom we took, and would have judg accord to our law.

24:7 but the chief captain lysia came upon us, and with great
viol took him away out of our hands, 24:8 command hi accusers
to come unto thee: by examin of whom thyself mayest take knowledge
of all these things, whereof we accus him.

24:9 and the jew also assented, say that these thing were so.

24:10 then paul, after that the governor had beckon unto him to
speak, answered, forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of mani years
a judg unto thi nation, I do the more cheer answer for myself:
24:11 becaus that thou mayest understand, that there are yet but
twelv day sinc I went up to jerusalem for to worship.

24:12 and they neither found me in the templ disput with ani man,
neith rais up the people, neither in the synagogues, nor in the
city: 24:13 neither can they prove the thing whereof they now accuse
me.

24:14 but thi I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
heresy, so worship I the god of my fathers, believ all thing which
ar written in the law and in the prophets: 24:15 and have hope toward
god, which they themselv also allow, that there shall be a
resurrect of the dead, both of the just and unjust.

24:16 and herein do I exercis myself, to have alway a conscience
void to offenc toward god, and toward men.

24:17 now after mani year I came to bring alm to my nation, and
offerings.

24:18 whereupon certain jew from asia found me purifi in the
temple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult.

24:19 who ought to have been here befor thee, and object, if they had
ought against me.

24:20 Or els let these same here say, if they have found ani evil
do in me, while I stood befor the council, 24:21 except it be for
thi one voice, that I cri stand among them, touch the
resurrect of the dead I am call in question by you thi day.

24:22 and when felix heard these things, have more perfect knowledge
of that way, he defer them, and said, when lysia the chief captain
shal come down, I will know the uttermost of your matter.

24:23 and he command a centurion to keep paul, and to let him have
liberty, and that he should forbid none of hi acquaint to
minist or come unto him.

24:24 and after certain days, when felix came with hi wife drusilla,
which wa a jewess, he sent for paul, and heard him concern the
faith in christ.

24:25 and as he reason of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, felix trembled, and answered, Go thi way for thi time; when i
hav a conveni season, I will call for thee.

24:26 He hope also that money should have been given him of paul,
that he might loos him: wherefor he sent for him the oftener, and
commun with him.

24:27 but after two year porciu festu came into felix' room: and
felix, will to shew the jew a pleasure, left paul bound.

25:1 now when festu wa come into the province, after three day he
ascend from caesarea to jerusalem.

25:2 then the high priest and the chief of the jew inform him
against paul, and besought him, 25:3 and desir favour against him,
that he would send for him to jerusalem, lay wait in the way to
kil him.

25:4 but festu answered, that paul should be kept at caesarea, and
that he himself would depart shortli thither.

25:5 let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down
with me, and accus thi man, if there be ani wicked in him.

25:6 and when he had tarri among them more than ten days, he went
down unto caesarea; and the next day sit on the judgment seat
command paul to be brought.

25:7 and when he wa come, the jew which came down from jerusalem
stood round about, and laid mani and grievou complaint against paul,
which they could not prove.

25:8 while he answer for himself, neither against the law of the
jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against caesar, have i
offend ani thing at all.

25:9 but festus, will to do the jew a pleasure, answer paul, and
said, wilt thou go up to jerusalem, and there be judg of these
th befor me?  25:10 then said paul, I stand at caesar' judgment
seat, where I ought to be judged: to the jew have I done no wrong, as
thou veri well knowest.

25:11 for if I be an offender, or have commit ani thing worthi of
death, I refus not to die: but if there be none of these things
whereof these accus me, no man may deliv me unto them. I appeal
unto caesar.

25:12 then festus, when he had confer with the council, answered,
hast thou appeal unto caesar? unto caesar shalt thou go.

25:13 and after certain day king agrippa and bernic came unto
caesarea to salut festus.

25:14 and when they had been there mani days, festu declar paul's
caus unto the king, saying, there is a certain man left in bond by
felix: 25:15 about whom, when I wa at jerusalem, the chief priests
and the elder of the jew inform me, desir to have judgment
against him.

25:16 To whom I answered, It is not the manner of the roman to
deliv ani man to die, befor that he which is accus have the
accus face to face, and have licenc to answer for himself
concern the crime laid against him.

25:17 therefore, when they were come hither, without ani delay on the
morrow I sat on the judgment seat, and command the man to be brought
forth.

25:18 against whom when the accus stood up, they brought none
accus of such thing as I supposed: 25:19 but had certain
quest against him of their own superstition, and of one jesus,
which wa dead, whom paul affirm to be alive.

25:20 and becaus I doubt of such manner of questions, I ask him
wheth he would go to jerusalem, and there be judg of these
matters.

25:21 but when paul had appeal to be reserv unto the hear of
augustus, I command him to be kept till I might send him to caesar.

25:22 then agrippa said unto festus, I would also hear the man myself.
to morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.

25:23 and on the morrow, when agrippa wa come, and bernice, with
great pomp, and wa enter into the place of hearing, with the chief
captains, and princip men of the city, at festus' command paul
wa brought forth.

25:24 and festu said, king agrippa, and all men which are here
pres with us, ye see thi man, about whom all the multitud of the
jew have dealt with me, both at jerusalem, and also here, cri that
h ought not to live ani longer.

25:25 but when I found that he had commit noth worthi of death,
and that he himself hath appeal to augustus, I have determin to
send him.

25:26 Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord. wherefore
i have brought him forth befor you, and special befor thee, O king
agrippa, that, after examin had, I might have somewhat to write.

25:27 for it seemeth to me unreason to send a prisoner, and not
with to signifi the crime laid against him.

26:1 then agrippa said unto paul, thou art permit to speak for
thyself.

then paul stretch forth the hand, and answer for himself: 26:2 i
think myself happy, king agrippa, becaus I shall answer for myself
thi day befor thee touch all the thing whereof I am accus of
th jews: 26:3 especi becaus I know thee to be expert in all
custom and question which are among the jews: wherefor I beseech
the to hear me patiently.

26:4 My manner of life from my youth, which wa at the first among
min own nation at jerusalem, know all the jews; 26:5 which knew me
from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most
straitest sect of our religion I live a pharisee.

26:6 and now I stand and am judg for the hope of the promis made of
god, unto our fathers: 26:7 unto which promis our twelv tribes,
instantli serv god day and night, hope to come. for which hope's
sake, king agrippa, I am accus of the jews.

26:8 whi should it be thought a thing incred with you, that god
should rais the dead?  26:9 I verili thought with myself, that i
ought to do mani thing contrari to the name of jesu of nazareth.

26:10 which thing I also did in jerusalem: and mani of the saint did
i shut up in prison, have receiv author from the chief priests;
and when they were put to death, I gave my voic against them.

26:11 and I punish them oft in everi synagogue, and compel them
to blaspheme; and be exceedingli mad against them, I persecuted
them even unto strang cities.

26:12 whereupon as I went to damascu with author and commission
from the chief priests, 26:13 At midday, O king, I saw in the way a
light from heaven, abov the bright of the sun, shine round
about me and them which journey with me.

26:14 and when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice
speak unto me, and say in the hebrew tongue, saul, saul, why
persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

26:15 and I said, who art thou, lord? and he said, I am jesu whom
thou persecutest.

26:16 but rise, and stand upon thi feet: for I have appear unto thee
for thi purpose, to make thee a minist and a wit both of these
th which thou hast seen, and of those thing in the which I will
appear unto thee; 26:17 deliv thee from the people, and from the
gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, 26:18 To open their eyes, and to
turn them from dark to light, and from the power of satan unto
god, that they may receiv forgiv of sins, and inherit among
them which are sanctifi by faith that is in me.

26:19 whereupon, O king agrippa, I wa not disobedi unto the
heavenli vision: 26:20 but shew first unto them of damascus, and at
jerusalem, and throughout all the coast of judaea, and then to the
gentiles, that they should repent and turn to god, and do work meet
for repentance.

26:21 for these caus the jew caught me in the temple, and went
about to kill me.

26:22 have therefor obtain help of god, I continu unto thi day,
wit both to small and great, say none other thing than
thos which the prophet and mose did say should come: 26:23 that
christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise
from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the
gentiles.

26:24 and as he thu spake for himself, festu said with a loud voice,
paul, thou art besid thyself; much learn doth make thee mad.

26:25 but he said, I am not mad, most nobl festus; but speak forth
th word of truth and soberness.

26:26 for the king knoweth of these things, befor whom also I speak
freely: for I am persuad that none of these thing are hidden from
him; for thi thing wa not done in a corner.

26:27 king agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou
believest.

26:28 then agrippa said unto paul, almost thou persuadest me to be a
christian.

26:29 and paul said, I would to god, that not onli thou, but also all
that hear me thi day, were both almost, and altogeth such as I am,
except these bonds.

26:30 and when he had thu spoken, the king rose up, and the governor,
and bernice, and they that sat with them: 26:31 and when they were
gon aside, they talk between themselves, saying, thi man doeth
noth worthi of death or of bonds.

26:32 then said agrippa unto festus, thi man might have been set at
liberty, if he had not appeal unto caesar.

27:1 and when it wa determin that we should sail into italy, they
deliv paul and certain other prison unto one name julius, a
centurion of augustus' band.

27:2 and enter into a ship of adramyttium, we launched, mean to
sail by the coast of asia; one aristarchus, a macedonian of
thessalonica, be with us.

27:3 and the next day we touch at sidon. and juliu courteously
entr paul, and gave him liberti to go unto hi friend to refresh
himself.

27:4 and when we had launch from thence, we sail under cyprus,
becaus the wind were contrary.

27:5 and when we had sail over the sea of cilicia and pamphylia, we
cam to myra, a citi of lycia.

27:6 and there the centurion found a ship of alexandria sail into
italy; and he put us therein.

27:7 and when we had sail slowli mani days, and scarc were come
ov against cnidus, the wind not suffer us, we sail under crete,
ov against salmone; 27:8 and, hardli pass it, came unto a place
which is call the fair havens; nigh whereunto wa the citi of lasea.

27:9 now when much time wa spent, and when sail wa now dangerous,
becaus the fast wa now alreadi past, paul admonish them, 27:10 and
said unto them, sirs, I perceiv that thi voyag will be with hurt
and much damage, not onli of the lade and ship, but also of our
lives.

27:11 nevertheless the centurion believ the master and the owner of
th ship, more than those thing which were spoken by paul.

27:12 and becaus the haven wa not commodi to winter in, the more
part advis to depart thenc also, if by ani mean they might attain
to phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven of crete, and lieth
toward the south west and north west.

27:13 and when the south wind blew softly, suppos that they had
obtain their purpose, loos thence, they sail close by crete.

27:14 but not long after there aros against it a tempestu wind,
cal euroclydon.

27:15 and when the ship wa caught, and could not bear up into the
wind, we let her drive.

27:16 and run under a certain island which is call clauda, we
had much work to come by the boat: 27:17 which when they had taken up,
they use helps, undergird the ship; and, fear lest they should
fal into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven.

27:18 and we be exceedingli toss with a tempest, the next day
they lighten the ship; 27:19 and the third day we cast out with our
own hand the tackl of the ship.

27:20 and when neither sun nor star in mani day appeared, and no
smal tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be save wa then
taken away.

27:21 but after long abstin paul stood forth in the midst of them,
and said, sirs, ye should have hearken unto me, and not have loosed
from crete, and to have gain thi harm and loss.

27:22 and now I exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no
loss of ani man' life among you, but of the ship.

27:23 for there stood by me thi night the angel of god, whose I am,
and whom I serve, 27:24 saying, fear not, paul; thou must be brought
befor caesar: and, lo, god hath given thee all them that sail with
thee.

27:25 wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for I believ god, that it
shal be even as it wa told me.

27:26 howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island.

27:27 but when the fourteenth night wa come, as we were driven up and
down in adria, about midnight the shipmen deem that they drew near
to some country; 27:28 and sounded, and found it twenti fathoms: and
when they had gone a littl further, they sound again, and found it
fifteen fathoms.

27:29 then fear lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast
four anchor out of the stern, and wish for the day.

27:30 and as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they
had let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would
hav cast anchor out of the foreship, 27:31 paul said to the
centurion and to the soldiers, except these abid in the ship, ye
cannot be saved.

27:32 then the soldier cut off the rope of the boat, and let her
fal off.

27:33 and while the day wa come on, paul besought them all to take
meat, saying, thi day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarri and
continu fasting, have taken nothing.

27:34 wherefor I pray you to take some meat: for thi is for your
health: for there shall not an hair fall from the head of ani of you.

27:35 and when he had thu spoken, he took bread, and gave thank to
god in presenc of them all: and when he had broken it, he began to
eat.

27:36 then were they all of good cheer, and they also took some meat.

27:37 and we were in all in the ship two hundr threescor and
sixteen souls.

27:38 and when they had eaten enough, they lighten the ship, and
cast out the wheat into the sea.

27:39 and when it wa day, they knew not the land: but they discovered
a certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it
wer possible, to thrust in the ship.

27:40 and when they had taken up the anchors, they committed
themselv unto the sea, and loos the rudder bands, and hois up
th mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.

27:41 and fall into a place where two sea met, they ran the ship
aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remain unmoveable, but the
hind part wa broken with the violenc of the waves.

27:42 and the soldiers' counsel wa to kill the prisoners, lest ani of
them should swim out, and escape.

27:43 but the centurion, will to save paul, kept them from their
purpose; and command that they which could swim should cast
themselv first into the sea, and get to land: 27:44 and the rest,
som on boards, and some on broken piec of the ship.

and so it came to pass, that they escap all safe to land.

28:1 and when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was
cal melita.

28:2 and the barbar peopl shew us no littl kindness: for they
kindl a fire, and receiv us everi one, becaus of the present
rain, and becaus of the cold.

28:3 and when paul had gather a bundl of sticks, and laid them on
th fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fasten on his
hand.

28:4 and when the barbarian saw the venom beast hang on hi hand,
they said among themselves, No doubt thi man is a murderer, whom,
though he hath escap the sea, yet vengeanc suffereth not to live.

28:5 and he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm.

28:6 howbeit they look when he should have swollen, or fallen down
dead suddenly: but after they had look a great while, and saw no
harm come to him, they chang their minds, and said that he wa a
god.

28:7 In the same quarter were possess of the chief man of the
island, whose name wa publius; who receiv us, and lodg us three
day courteously.

28:8 and it came to pass, that the father of publiu lay sick of a
fev and of a bloodi flux: to whom paul enter in, and prayed, and
laid hi hand on him, and heal him.

28:9 So when thi wa done, other also, which had diseas in the
island, came, and were healed: 28:10 who also honour us with many
honours; and when we departed, they lade us with such thing as were
necessary.

28:11 and after three month we depart in a ship of alexandria,
which had winter in the isle, whose sign wa castor and pollux.

28:12 and land at syracuse, we tarri there three days.

28:13 and from thenc we fetch a compass, and came to rhegium: and
aft one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to
puteoli: 28:14 where we found brethren, and were desir to tarri with
them seven days: and so we went toward rome.

28:15 and from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to
meet us as far as appii forum, and the three taverns: whom when paul
saw, he thank god, and took courage.

28:16 and when we came to rome, the centurion deliv the prisoners
to the captain of the guard: but paul wa suffer to dwell by himself
with a soldier that kept him.

28:17 and it came to pass, that after three day paul call the chief
of the jew together: and when they were come together, he said unto
them, men and brethren, though I have commit noth against the
people, or custom of our fathers, yet wa I deliv prison from
jerusalem into the hand of the romans.

28:18 who, when they had examin me, would have let me go, because
ther wa no caus of death in me.

28:19 but when the jew spake against it, I wa constrain to appeal
unto caesar; not that I had ought to accus my nation of.

28:20 for thi caus therefor have I call for you, to see you, and
to speak with you: becaus that for the hope of israel I am bound with
thi chain.

28:21 and they said unto him, We neither receiv letter out of
judaea concern thee, neither ani of the brethren that came shewed
or spake ani harm of thee.

28:22 but we desir to hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as
concern thi sect, we know that everi where it is spoken against.

28:23 and when they had appoint him a day, there came mani to him
into hi lodging; to whom he expound and testifi the kingdom of
god, persuad them concern jesus, both out of the law of moses,
and out of the prophets, from morn till evening.

28:24 and some believ the thing which were spoken, and some
believ not.

28:25 and when they agre not among themselves, they departed, after
that paul had spoken one word, well spake the holi ghost by esaia the
prophet unto our fathers, 28:26 saying, Go unto thi people, and say,
hear ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and see ye shall
see, and not perceive: 28:27 for the heart of thi peopl is waxed
gross, and their ear are dull of hearing, and their eye have they
closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and i
should heal them.

28:28 Be it known therefor unto you, that the salvat of god is
sent unto the gentiles, and that they will hear it.

28:29 and when he had said these words, the jew departed, and had
great reason among themselves.

28:30 and paul dwelt two whole year in hi own hire house, and
receiv all that came in unto him, 28:31 preach the kingdom of
god, and teach those thing which concern the lord jesu christ,
with all confidence, no man forbid him.




th epistl of paul the apostl to the romans


1:1 paul, a servant of jesu christ, call to be an apostle,
separ unto the gospel of god, 1:2 (which he had promis afor by
hi prophet in the holi scriptures,) 1:3 concern hi son jesus
christ our lord, which wa made of the seed of david accord to the
flesh; 1:4 and declar to be the son of god with power, accord to
th spirit of holiness, by the resurrect from the dead: 1:5 By whom
w have receiv grace and apostleship, for obedi to the faith
among all nations, for hi name: 1:6 among whom are ye also the called
of jesu christ: 1:7 To all that be in rome, belov of god, call to
b saints: grace to you and peac from god our father, and the lord
jesu christ.

1:8 first, I thank my god through jesu christ for you all, that your
faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.

1:9 for god is my witness, whom I serv with my spirit in the gospel
of hi son, that without ceas I make mention of you alway in my
prayers; 1:10 make request, if by ani mean now at length I might
hav a prosper journey by the will of god to come unto you.

1:11 for I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual
gift, to the end ye may be established; 1:12 that is, that I may be
comfort togeth with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.

1:13 now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentim i
purpos to come unto you, (but wa let hitherto,) that I might have
som fruit among you also, even as among other gentiles.

1:14 I am debtor both to the greeks, and to the barbarians; both to
th wise, and to the unwise.

1:15 so, as much as in me is, I am readi to preach the gospel to you
that are at rome also.

1:16 for I am not asham of the gospel of christ: for it is the power
of god unto salvat to everi one that believeth; to the jew first,
and also to the greek.

1:17 for therein is the righteous of god reveal from faith to
faith: as it is written, the just shall live by faith.

1:18 for the wrath of god is reveal from heaven against all
ungodli and unright of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness; 1:19 becaus that which may be known of god is
manifest in them; for god hath shew it unto them.

1:20 for the invis thing of him from the creation of the world
ar clearli seen, be understood by the thing that are made, even
hi etern power and godhead; so that they are without excuse: 1:21
becaus that, when they knew god, they glorifi him not as god,
neith were thankful; but becam vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart wa darkened.

1:22 profess themselv to be wise, they becam fools, 1:23 and
chang the glori of the uncorrupt god into an imag made like to
corrupt man, and to birds, and fourfoot beasts, and creeping
things.

1:24 wherefor god also gave them up to unclean through the lusts
of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodi between themselves:
1:25 who chang the truth of god into a lie, and worship and
serv the creatur more than the creator, who is bless for ever.
amen.

1:26 for thi caus god gave them up unto vile affections: for even
their women did chang the natur use into that which is against
nature: 1:27 and likewis also the men, leav the natur use of the
woman, burn in their lust one toward another; men with men working
that which is unseemly, and receiv in themselv that recomp of
their error which wa meet.

1:28 and even as they did not like to retain god in their knowledge,
god gave them over to a reprob mind, to do those thing which are
not convenient; 1:29 be fill with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy,
murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, 1:30 backbiters, haters
of god, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventor of evil things,
disobedi to parents, 1:31 without understanding, covenantbreakers,
without natur affection, implacable, unmerciful: 1:32 who knowing
th judgment of god, that they which commit such thing are worthi of
death, not onli do the same, but have pleasur in them that do them.

2:1 therefor thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoev thou art that
judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself;
for thou that judgest doest the same things.

2:2 but we are sure that the judgment of god is accord to truth
against them which commit such things.

2:3 and thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such
things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escap the judgment of
god?  2:4 Or despisest thou the rich of hi good and forbearance
and longsuffering; not know that the good of god leadeth thee
to repentance?  2:5 but after thi hard and impenit heart
treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and
revel of the righteou judgment of god; 2:6 who will render to
everi man accord to hi deeds: 2:7 To them who by patient
continu in well do seek for glori and honour and immortality,
etern life: 2:8 but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey
th truth, but obey unrighteousness, indign and wrath, 2:9
tribul and anguish, upon everi soul of man that doeth evil, of
th jew first, and also of the gentile; 2:10 but glory, honour, and
peace, to everi man that worketh good, to the jew first, and also to
th gentile: 2:11 for there is no respect of person with god.

2:12 for as mani as have sin without law shall also perish without
law: and as mani as have sin in the law shall be judg by the law;
2:13 (for not the hearer of the law are just befor god, but the
doer of the law shall be justified.

2:14 for when the gentiles, which have not the law, do by natur the
th contain in the law, these, have not the law, are a law unto
themselves: 2:15 which shew the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscienc also bear witness, and their thought the
mean while accus or els excus one another;) 2:16 In the day
when god shall judg the secret of men by jesu christ accord to
mi gospel.

2:17 behold, thou art call a jew, and restest in the law, and makest
thi boast of god, 2:18 and knowest hi will, and approvest the things
that are more excellent, be instruct out of the law; 2:19 and art
confid that thou thyself art a guid of the blind, a light of them
which are in darkness, 2:20 An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of
babes, which hast the form of knowledg and of the truth in the law.

2:21 thou therefor which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?
th that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal?  2:22
thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit
adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?  2:23
thou that makest thi boast of the law, through break the law
dishonourest thou god?  2:24 for the name of god is blasphem among
th gentil through you, as it is written.

2:25 for circumcis verili profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if
thou be a breaker of the law, thi circumcis is made uncircumcision.

2:26 therefor if the uncircumcis keep the righteous of the
law, shall not hi uncircumcis be count for circumcision?  2:27
and shall not uncircumcis which is by nature, if it fulfil the law,
judg thee, who by the letter and circumcis dost transgress the
law?  2:28 for he is not a jew, which is one outwardly; neither is
that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: 2:29 but he is a
jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcis is that of the heart, in
th spirit, and not in the letter; whose prais is not of men, but of
god.

3:1 what advantag then hath the jew? or what profit is there of
circumcision?  3:2 much everi way: chiefly, becaus that unto them
wer commit the oracl of god.

3:3 for what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the
faith of god without effect?  3:4 god forbid: yea, let god be true,
but everi man a liar; as it is written, that thou mightest be
justifi in thi sayings, and mightest overcom when thou art judged.

3:5 but if our unright commend the righteous of god, what
shal we say? Is god unright who taketh vengeance? (I speak as a
man) 3:6 god forbid: for then how shall god judg the world?  3:7 for
if the truth of god hath more abound through my lie unto hi glory;
whi yet am I also judg as a sinner?  3:8 and not rather, (a we be
slander reported, and as some affirm that we say,) let us do
evil, that good may come? whose damnat is just.

3:9 what then? are we better than they? no, in no wise: for we have
befor prove both jew and gentiles, that they are all under sin;
3:10 As it is written, there is none righteous, no, not one: 3:11
there is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after
god.

3:12 they are all gone out of the way, they are togeth become
unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

3:13 their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongu they have
us deceit; the poison of asp is under their lips: 3:14 whose mouth
i full of curs and bitterness: 3:15 their feet are swift to shed
blood: 3:16 destruct and miseri are in their ways: 3:17 and the way
of peac have they not known: 3:18 there is no fear of god before
their eyes.

3:19 now we know that what thing soever the law saith, it saith to
them who are under the law: that everi mouth may be stopped, and all
th world may becom guilti befor god.

3:20 therefor by the deed of the law there shall no flesh be
justifi in hi sight: for by the law is the knowledg of sin.

3:21 but now the righteous of god without the law is manifested,
b wit by the law and the prophets; 3:22 even the
right of god which is by faith of jesu christ unto all and
upon all them that believe: for there is no difference: 3:23 for all
hav sinned, and come short of the glori of god; 3:24 be justified
fre by hi grace through the redempt that is in christ jesus:
3:25 whom god hath set forth to be a propiti through faith in his
blood, to declar hi righteous for the remiss of sin that are
past, through the forbear of god; 3:26 To declare, I say, at this
tim hi righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifi of
him which believeth in jesus.

3:27 where is boast then? It is excluded. By what law? of works?
nay: but by the law of faith.

3:28 therefor we conclud that a man is justifi by faith without
th deed of the law.

3:29 Is he the god of the jew only? is he not also of the gentiles?
yes, of the gentil also: 3:30 see it is one god, which shall
justifi the circumcis by faith, and uncircumcis through faith.

3:31 Do we then make void the law through faith? god forbid: yea, we
establish the law.

4:1 what shall we say then that abraham our father, as pertain to
th flesh, hath found?  4:2 for if abraham were justifi by works, he
hath whereof to glory; but not befor god.

4:3 for what saith the scripture? abraham believ god, and it was
count unto him for righteousness.

4:4 now to him that worketh is the reward not reckon of grace, but
of debt.

4:5 but to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth
th ungodly, hi faith is count for righteousness.

4:6 even as david also describeth the blessed of the man, unto
whom god imputeth righteous without works, 4:7 saying, bless are
they whose iniqu are forgiven, and whose sin are covered.

4:8 bless is the man to whom the lord will not imput sin.

4:9 cometh thi blessed then upon the circumcis only, or upon
th uncircumcis also? for we say that faith wa reckon to abraham
for righteousness.

4:10 how wa it then reckoned? when he wa in circumcision, or in
uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

4:11 and he receiv the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
right of the faith which he had yet be uncircumcised: that
h might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not
circumcised; that righteous might be imput unto them also: 4:12
and the father of circumcis to them who are not of the circumcision
only, but who also walk in the step of that faith of our father
abraham, which he had be yet uncircumcised.

4:13 for the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, wa not
to abraham, or to hi seed, through the law, but through the
right of faith.

4:14 for if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void,
and the promis made of none effect: 4:15 becaus the law worketh
wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression.

4:16 therefor it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end
th promis might be sure to all the seed; not to that onli which is
of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of abraham; who is
th father of us all, 4:17 (a it is written, I have made thee a
fath of mani nations,) befor him whom he believed, even god, who
quickeneth the dead, and calleth those thing which be not as though
they were.

4:18 who against hope believ in hope, that he might becom the
fath of mani nations, accord to that which wa spoken, So shall
thi seed be.

4:19 and be not weak in faith, he consid not hi own bodi now
dead, when he wa about an hundr year old, neither yet the deadness
of sarah' womb: 4:20 He stagger not at the promis of god through
unbelief; but wa strong in faith, give glori to god; 4:21 and being
 persuad that, what he had promised, he wa abl also to
perform.

4:22 and therefor it wa imput to him for righteousness.

4:23 now it wa not written for hi sake alone, that it wa imput to
him; 4:24 but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe
on him that rais up jesu our lord from the dead; 4:25 who was
deliv for our offences, and wa rais again for our
justification.

5:1 therefor be justifi by faith, we have peac with god through
our lord jesu christ: 5:2 By whom also we have access by faith into
thi grace wherein we stand, and rejoic in hope of the glori of god.

5:3 and not onli so, but we glori in tribul also: know that
tribul worketh patience; 5:4 and patience, experience; and
experience, hope: 5:5 and hope maketh not ashamed; becaus the love of
god is shed abroad in our heart by the holi ghost which is given unto
us.

5:6 for when we were yet without strength, in due time christ die for
th ungodly.

5:7 for scarc for a righteou man will one die: yet peradventure
for a good man some would even dare to die.

5:8 but god commendeth hi love toward us, in that, while we were yet
sinners, christ die for us.

5:9 much more then, be now justifi by hi blood, we shall be
sav from wrath through him.

5:10 for if, when we were enemies, we were reconcil to god by the
death of hi son, much more, be reconciled, we shall be save by
hi life.

5:11 and not onli so, but we also joy in god through our lord jesus
christ, by whom we have now receiv the atonement.

5:12 wherefore, as by one man sin enter into the world, and death by
sin; and so death pass upon all men, for that all have sinned: 5:13
(for until the law sin wa in the world: but sin is not imput when
ther is no law.

5:14 nevertheless death reign from adam to moses, even over them
that had not sin after the similitud of adam' transgression, who
i the figur of him that wa to come.

5:15 but not as the offence, so also is the free gift. for if through
th offenc of one mani be dead, much more the grace of god, and the
gift by grace, which is by one man, jesu christ, hath abound unto
many.

5:16 and not as it wa by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the
judg wa by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many
off unto justification.

5:17 for if by one man' offenc death reign by one; much more they
which receiv abund of grace and of the gift of righteousness
shal reign in life by one, jesu christ.)  5:18 therefor as by the
off of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by
th righteous of one the free gift came upon all men unto
justif of life.

5:19 for as by one man' disobedi mani were made sinners, so by
th obedi of one shall mani be made righteous.

5:20 moreov the law entered, that the offenc might abound. but
wher sin abounded, grace did much more abound: 5:21 that as sin hath
reign unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness
unto etern life by jesu christ our lord.

6:1 what shall we say then? shall we continu in sin, that grace may
abound?  6:2 god forbid. how shall we, that are dead to sin, live any
long therein?  6:3 know ye not, that so mani of us as were baptized
into jesu christ were baptiz into hi death?  6:4 therefor we are
buri with him by baptism into death: that like as christ wa raised
up from the dead by the glori of the father, even so we also should
walk in new of life.

6:5 for if we have been plant togeth in the like of hi death,
w shall be also in the like of hi resurrection: 6:6 knowing
this, that our old man is crucifi with him, that the bodi of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serv sin.

6:7 for he that is dead is freed from sin.

6:8 now if we be dead with christ, we believ that we shall also live
with him: 6:9 know that christ be rais from the dead dieth no
more; death hath no more dominion over him.

6:10 for in that he died, he die unto sin once: but in that he
liveth, he liveth unto god.

6:11 likewis reckon ye also yourselv to be dead inde unto sin,
but aliv unto god through jesu christ our lord.

6:12 let not sin therefor reign in your mortal body, that ye should
obey it in the lust thereof.

6:13 neither yield ye your member as instrument of unrighteousness
unto sin: but yield yourselv unto god, as those that are aliv from
th dead, and your member as instrument of righteous unto god.

6:14 for sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under
th law, but under grace.

6:15 what then? shall we sin, becaus we are not under the law, but
und grace? god forbid.

6:16 know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselv servant to obey,
hi servant ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of
obedi unto righteousness?  6:17 but god be thanked, that ye were
th servant of sin, but ye have obey from the heart that form of
doctrin which wa deliv you.

6:18 be then made free from sin, ye becam the servant of
righteousness.

6:19 I speak after the manner of men becaus of the infirm of your
flesh: for as ye have yield your member servant to unclean and
to iniqu unto iniquity; even so now yield your member servant to
right unto holiness.

6:20 for when ye were the servant of sin, ye were free from
righteousness.

6:21 what fruit had ye then in those thing whereof ye are now
ashamed?  for the end of those thing is death.

6:22 but now be made free from sin, and becom servant to god, ye
hav your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlast life.

6:23 for the wage of sin is death; but the gift of god is eternal
lif through jesu christ our lord.

7:1 know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law,)
how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?  7:2
for the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband
so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loos from
th law of her husband.

7:3 So then if, while her husband liveth, she be marri to another
man, she shall be call an adulteress: but if her husband be dead,
sh is free from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be
marri to anoth man.

7:4 wherefore, my brethren, ye also are becom dead to the law by the
bodi of christ; that ye should be marri to another, even to him who
i rais from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto god.

7:5 for when we were in the flesh, the motion of sins, which were by
th law, did work in our member to bring forth fruit unto death.

7:6 but now we are deliv from the law, that be dead wherein we
wer held; that we should serv in new of spirit, and not in the
old of the letter.

7:7 what shall we say then? Is the law sin? god forbid. nay, I had not
known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law
had said, thou shalt not covet.

7:8 but sin, take occas by the commandment, wrought in me all
mann of concupiscence. for without the law sin wa dead.

7:9 for I wa aliv without the law once: but when the commandment
came, sin revived, and I died.

7:10 and the commandment, which wa ordain to life, I found to be
unto death.

7:11 for sin, take occas by the commandment, deceiv me, and by
it slew me.

7:12 wherefor the law is holy, and the command holy, and just,
and good.

7:13 wa then that which is good made death unto me? god forbid. but
sin, that it might appear sin, work death in me by that which is
good; that sin by the command might becom exceed sinful.

7:14 for we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold
und sin.

7:15 for that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not;
but what I hate, that do i.

7:16 If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that
it is good.

7:17 now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.

7:18 for I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good
thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which
i good I find not.

7:19 for the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would
not, that I do.

7:20 now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwelleth in me.

7:21 I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present
with me.

7:22 for I delight in the law of god after the inward man: 7:23 but i
se anoth law in my members, war against the law of my mind, and
bring me into captiv to the law of sin which is in my members.

7:24 O wretch man that I am! who shall deliv me from the bodi of
thi death?  7:25 I thank god through jesu christ our lord. So then
with the mind I myself serv the law of god; but with the flesh the
law of sin.

8:1 there is therefor now no condemn to them which are in christ
jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

8:2 for the law of the spirit of life in christ jesu hath made me
fre from the law of sin and death.

8:3 for what the law could not do, in that it wa weak through the
flesh, god send hi own son in the like of sin flesh, and
for sin, condemn sin in the flesh: 8:4 that the righteous of the
law might be fulfil in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
th spirit.

8:5 for they that are after the flesh do mind the thing of the flesh;
but they that are after the spirit the thing of the spirit.

8:6 for to be carnal mind is death; but to be spiritu minded
i life and peace.

8:7 becaus the carnal mind is enmiti against god: for it is not
subject to the law of god, neither inde can be.

8:8 So then they that are in the flesh cannot pleas god.

8:9 but ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the
spirit of god dwell in you. now if ani man have not the spirit of
christ, he is none of his.

8:10 and if christ be in you, the bodi is dead becaus of sin; but the
spirit is life becaus of righteousness.

8:11 but if the spirit of him that rais up jesu from the dead dwell
in you, he that rais up christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mort bodi by hi spirit that dwelleth in you.

8:12 therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
aft the flesh.

8:13 for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through
th spirit do mortifi the deed of the body, ye shall live.

8:14 for as mani as are led by the spirit of god, they are the son of
god.

8:15 for ye have not receiv the spirit of bondag again to fear; but
y have receiv the spirit of adoption, wherebi we cry, abba, father.

8:16 the spirit itself beareth wit with our spirit, that we are
th children of god: 8:17 and if children, then heirs; heir of god,
and joint-heir with christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorifi together.

8:18 for I reckon that the suffer of thi present time are not
worthi to be compar with the glori which shall be reveal in us.

8:19 for the earnest expect of the creatur waiteth for the
manifest of the son of god.

8:20 for the creatur wa made subject to vanity, not willingly, but
bi reason of him who hath subject the same in hope, 8:21 becaus the
creatur itself also shall be deliv from the bondag of corruption
into the gloriou liberti of the children of god.

8:22 for we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in
pain togeth until now.

8:23 and not onli they, but ourselv also, which have the firstfruits
of the spirit, even we ourselv groan within ourselves, wait for
th adoption, to wit, the redempt of our body.

8:24 for we are save by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for
what a man seeth, whi doth he yet hope for?  8:25 but if we hope for
that we see not, then do we with patienc wait for it.

8:26 likewis the spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought: but the spirit itself maketh
intercess for us with groan which cannot be uttered.

8:27 and he that searcheth the heart knoweth what is the mind of the
spirit, becaus he maketh intercess for the saint accord to the
wil of god.

8:28 and we know that all thing work togeth for good to them that
lov god, to them who are the call accord to hi purpose.

8:29 for whom he did foreknow, he also did predestin to be
conform to the imag of hi son, that he might be the firstborn
among mani brethren.

8:30 moreov whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom
h called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.

8:31 what shall we then say to these things? If god be for us, who can
b against us?  8:32 He that spare not hi own son, but deliv him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freeli give us all
things?  8:33 who shall lay ani thing to the charg of god' elect? it
i god that justifieth.

8:34 who is he that condemneth? It is christ that died, yea rather,
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of god, who also
maketh intercess for us.

8:35 who shall separ us from the love of christ? shall tribulation,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword?  8:36 As it is written, for thi sake we are kill all the day
long; we are account as sheep for the slaughter.

8:37 nay, in all these thing we are more than conqueror through him
that love us.

8:38 for I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor thing present, nor thing to come,
8:39 nor height, nor depth, nor ani other creature, shall be abl to
separ us from the love of god, which is in christ jesu our lord.

9:1 I say the truth in christ, I lie not, my conscienc also bearing
m wit in the holi ghost, 9:2 that I have great heavi and
continu sorrow in my heart.

9:3 for I could wish that myself were accurs from christ for my
brethren, my kinsmen accord to the flesh: 9:4 who are israelites;
to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
th give of the law, and the servic of god, and the promises; 9:5
whose are the fathers, and of whom as concern the flesh christ
came, who is over all, god bless for ever. amen.

9:6 not as though the word of god hath taken none effect. for they are
not all israel, which are of israel: 9:7 neither, becaus they are the
se of abraham, are they all children: but, In isaac shall thi seed
b called.

9:8 that is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not
th children of god: but the children of the promis are count for
th seed.

9:9 for thi is the word of promise, At thi time will I come, and
sarah shall have a son.

9:10 and not onli this; but when rebecca also had conceiv by one,
even by our father isaac; 9:11 (for the children be not yet born,
neith have done ani good or evil, that the purpos of god
accord to elect might stand, not of works, but of him that
calleth;) 9:12 It wa said unto her, the elder shall serv the
younger.

9:13 As it is written, jacob have I loved, but esau have I hated.

9:14 what shall we say then? Is there unright with god? god
forbid.

9:15 for he saith to moses, I will have merci on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compass on whom I will have compassion.

9:16 So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of god that sheweth mercy.

9:17 for the scriptur saith unto pharaoh, even for thi same purpose
hav I rais thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my
nam might be declar throughout all the earth.

9:18 therefor hath he merci on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
wil he hardeneth.

9:19 thou wilt say then unto me, whi doth he yet find fault? for who
hath resist hi will?  9:20 nay but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against god? shall the thing form say to him that formed
it, whi hast thou made me thus?  9:21 hath not the potter power over
th clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another
unto dishonour?  9:22 what if god, will to shew hi wrath, and to
mak hi power known, endur with much longsuff the vessel of
wrath fit to destruction: 9:23 and that he might make known the
rich of hi glori on the vessel of mercy, which he had afore
prepar unto glory, 9:24 even us, whom he hath called, not of the
jew only, but also of the gentiles?  9:25 As he saith also in osee, i
wil call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved,
which wa not beloved.

9:26 and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it wa said
unto them, Ye are not my people; there shall they be call the
children of the live god.

9:27 esaia also crieth concern israel, though the number of the
children of israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be
saved: 9:28 for he will finish the work, and cut it short in
righteousness: becaus a short work will the lord make upon the earth.

9:29 and as esaia said before, except the lord of sabaoth had left us
a seed, we had been as sodoma, and been made like unto gomorrha.

9:30 what shall we say then? that the gentiles, which follow not
aft righteousness, have attain to righteousness, even the
right which is of faith.

9:31 but israel, which follow after the law of righteousness, hath
not attain to the law of righteousness.

9:32 wherefore? becaus they sought it not by faith, but as it were by
th work of the law. for they stumbl at that stumblingstone; 9:33
a it is written, behold, I lay in sion a stumblingston and rock of
offence: and whosoev believeth on him shall not be ashamed.

10:1 brethren, my heart' desir and prayer to god for israel is, that
they might be saved.

10:2 for I bear them record that they have a zeal of god, but not
accord to knowledge.

10:3 for they be ignor of god' righteousness, and go about
to establish their own righteousness, have not submit themselves
unto the righteous of god.

10:4 for christ is the end of the law for righteous to everi one
that believeth.

10:5 for mose describeth the righteous which is of the law, that
th man which doeth those thing shall live by them.

10:6 but the righteous which is of faith speaketh on thi wise,
say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to
br christ down from above:) 10:7 or, who shall descend into the
deep? (that is, to bring up christ again from the dead.)  10:8 but
what saith it? the word is nigh thee, even in thi mouth, and in thy
heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach; 10:9 that if thou
shalt confess with thi mouth the lord jesus, and shalt believ in
thin heart that god hath rais him from the dead, thou shalt be
saved.

10:10 for with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with
th mouth confess is made unto salvation.

10:11 for the scriptur saith, whosoev believeth on him shall not be
ashamed.

10:12 for there is no differ between the jew and the greek: for
th same lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.

10:13 for whosoev shall call upon the name of the lord shall be
saved.

10:14 how then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believ in him of whom they have not heard? and how
shal they hear without a preacher?  10:15 and how shall they preach,
except they be sent? as it is written, how beauti are the feet of
them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tide of good
things!  10:16 but they have not all obey the gospel. for esaias
saith, lord, who hath believ our report?  10:17 So then faith cometh
bi hearing, and hear by the word of god.

10:18 but I say, have they not heard? ye verily, their sound went
into all the earth, and their word unto the end of the world.

10:19 but I say, did not israel know? first mose saith, I will
provok you to jealousi by them that are no people, and by a foolish
n I will anger you.

10:20 but esaia is veri bold, and saith, I wa found of them that
sought me not; I wa made manifest unto them that ask not after me.

10:21 but to israel he saith, all day long I have stretch forth my
hand unto a disobedi and gainsay people.

11:1 I say then, hath god cast away hi people? god forbid. for I also
am an israelite, of the seed of abraham, of the tribe of benjamin.

11:2 god hath not cast away hi peopl which he foreknew. wot ye not
what the scriptur saith of elias? how he maketh intercess to god
against israel saying, 11:3 lord, they have kill thi prophets, and
dig down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.

11:4 but what saith the answer of god unto him? I have reserv to
myself seven thousand men, who have not bow the knee to the imag of
baal.

11:5 even so then at thi present time also there is a remnant
accord to the elect of grace.

11:6 and if by grace, then is it no more of works: otherwis grace is
no more grace. but if it be of works, then it is no more grace:
otherwis work is no more work.

11:7 what then? israel hath not obtain that which he seeketh for;
but the elect hath obtain it, and the rest were blinded.

11:8 (accord as it is written, god hath given them the spirit of
slumber, eye that they should not see, and ear that they should not
hear;) unto thi day.

11:9 and david saith, let their tabl be made a snare, and a trap, and
a stumblingblock, and a recomp unto them: 11:10 let their eye be
darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their back alway.

11:11 I say then, have they stumbl that they should fall? god
forbid: but rather through their fall salvat is come unto the
gentiles, for to provok them to jealousy.

11:12 now if the fall of them be the rich of the world, and the
diminish of them the rich of the gentiles; how much more their
fulness?  11:13 for I speak to you gentiles, inasmuch as I am the
apostl of the gentiles, I magnifi mine office: 11:14 If by ani means
i may provok to emul them which are my flesh, and might save
som of them.

11:15 for if the cast away of them be the reconcil of the world,
what shall the receiv of them be, but life from the dead?  11:16
for if the firstfruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root
b holy, so are the branches.

11:17 and if some of the branch be broken off, and thou, be a
wild oliv tree, wert graf in among them, and with them partakest
of the root and fat of the oliv tree; 11:18 boast not against the
branches. but if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root
thee.

11:19 thou wilt say then, the branch were broken off, that I might
b graf in.

11:20 well; becaus of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
standest by faith. Be not highminded, but fear: 11:21 for if god
spar not the natur branches, take heed lest he also spare not
thee.

11:22 behold therefor the good and sever of god: on them which
fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continu in his
goodness: otherwis thou also shalt be cut off.

11:23 and they also, if they abid not still in unbelief, shall be
graf in: for god is abl to graff them in again.

11:24 for if thou wert cut out of the oliv tree which is wild by
nature, and wert graf contrari to natur into a good oliv tree:
how much more shall these, which be the natur branches, be graffed
into their own oliv tree?  11:25 for I would not, brethren, that ye
should be ignor of thi mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits; that blind in part is happen to israel, until the
 of the gentil be come in.

11:26 and so all israel shall be saved: as it is written, there shall
com out of sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodli from
jacob: 11:27 for thi is my coven unto them, when I shall take away
their sins.

11:28 As concern the gospel, they are enemi for your sakes: but
a touch the election, they are belov for the father' sakes.

11:29 for the gift and call of god are without repentance.

11:30 for as ye in time past have not believ god, yet have now
obtain merci through their unbelief: 11:31 even so have these also
now not believed, that through your merci they also may obtain mercy.

11:32 for god hath conclud them all in unbelief, that he might have
merci upon all.

11:33 O the depth of the rich both of the wisdom and knowledg of
god!  how unsearch are hi judgments, and hi way past finding
out!  11:34 for who hath known the mind of the lord? or who hath been
hi counsellor?  11:35 Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be
recompens unto him again?  11:36 for of him, and through him, and to
him, are all things: to whom be glori for ever. amen.

12:1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the merci of god, that ye
pres your bodi a live sacrifice, holy, accept unto god,
which is your reason service.

12:2 and be not conform to thi world: but be ye transform by the
renew of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and
acceptable, and perfect, will of god.

12:3 for I say, through the grace given unto me, to everi man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highli than he ought to think;
but to think soberly, accord as god hath dealt to everi man the
measur of faith.

12:4 for as we have mani member in one body, and all member have not
th same office: 12:5 So we, be many, are one bodi in christ, and
everi one member one of another.

12:6 have then gift differ accord to the grace that is given
to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesi accord to the proportion
of faith; 12:7 Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that
teacheth, on teaching; 12:8 Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he
that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with
diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.

12:9 let love be without dissimulation. abhor that which is evil;
cleav to that which is good.

12:10 Be kindli affect one to anoth with brotherli love; in
honour prefer one another; 12:11 not sloth in business; fervent
in spirit; serv the lord; 12:12 rejoic in hope; patient in
tribulation; continu instant in prayer; 12:13 distribut to the
necess of saints; given to hospitality.

12:14 bless them which persecut you: bless, and curs not.

12:15 rejoic with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

12:16 Be of the same mind one toward another. mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.

12:17 recompens to no man evil for evil. provid thing honest in the
sight of all men.

12:18 If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceabl with
al men.

12:19 dearli beloved, aveng not yourselves, but rather give place
unto wrath: for it is written, vengeanc is mine; I will repay, saith
th lord.

12:20 therefor if thine enemi hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give
him drink: for in so do thou shalt heap coal of fire on hi head.

12:21 Be not overcom of evil, but overcom evil with good.

13:1 let everi soul be subject unto the higher powers. for there is no
pow but of god: the power that be are ordain of god.

13:2 whosoev therefor resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance
of god: and they that resist shall receiv to themselv damnation.

13:3 for ruler are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. wilt
thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shalt have prais of the same: 13:4 for he is the minist of god to
the for good. but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he
beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minist of god, a
reveng to execut wrath upon him that doeth evil.

13:5 wherefor ye must need be subject, not onli for wrath, but also
for conscienc sake.

13:6 for for thi caus pay ye tribut also: for they are god's
ministers, attend continu upon thi veri thing.

13:7 render therefor to all their dues: tribut to whom tribut is
due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.

13:8 owe no man ani thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth
anoth hath fulfil the law.

13:9 for this, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not kill,
thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear fals witness, thou shalt
not covet; and if there be ani other commandment, it is briefly
comprehend in thi saying, namely, thou shalt love thi neighbour as
thyself.

13:10 love worketh no ill to hi neighbour: therefor love is the
fulfil of the law.

13:11 and that, know the time, that now it is high time to awake
out of sleep: for now is our salvat nearer than when we believed.

13:12 the night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore
cast off the work of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.

13:13 let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in riot and
drunkenness, not in chamber and wantonness, not in strife and
envying.

13:14 but put ye on the lord jesu christ, and make not provis for
th flesh, to fulfil the lust thereof.

14:1 him that is weak in the faith receiv ye, but not to doubtful
disputations.

14:2 for one believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is
weak, eateth herbs.

14:3 let not him that eateth despis him that eateth not; and let not
him which eateth not judg him that eateth: for god hath receiv him.

14:4 who art thou that judgest anoth man' servant? to hi own
mast he standeth or falleth. yea, he shall be holden up: for god is
abl to make him stand.

14:5 one man esteemeth one day abov another: anoth esteemeth every
day alike. let everi man be fulli persuad in hi own mind.

14:6 He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the lord; and he
that regardeth not the day, to the lord he doth not regard it. He that
eateth, eateth to the lord, for he giveth god thanks; and he that
eateth not, to the lord he eateth not, and giveth god thanks.

14:7 for none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.

14:8 for whether we live, we live unto the lord; and whether we die,
w die unto the lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the
lord's.

14:9 for to thi end christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he
might be lord both of the dead and living.

14:10 but whi dost thou judg thi brother? or whi dost thou set at
nought thi brother? for we shall all stand befor the judgment seat of
christ.

14:11 for it is written, As I live, saith the lord, everi knee shall
bow to me, and everi tongu shall confess to god.

14:12 So then everi one of us shall give account of himself to god.

14:13 let us not therefor judg one anoth ani more: but judg this
rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occas to fall in his
brother' way.

14:14 I know, and am persuad by the lord jesus, that there is
noth unclean of itself: but to him that esteemeth ani thing to be
unclean, to him it is unclean.

14:15 but if thi brother be griev with thi meat, now walkest thou
not charitably. destroy not him with thi meat, for whom christ died.

14:16 let not then your good be evil spoken of: 14:17 for the kingdom
of god is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in
th holi ghost.

14:18 for he that in these thing serveth christ is accept to god,
and approv of men.

14:19 let us therefor follow after the thing which make for peace,
and thing wherewith one may edifi another.

14:20 for meat destroy not the work of god. all thing inde are
pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence.

14:21 It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any
th wherebi thi brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

14:22 hast thou faith? have it to thyself befor god. happi is he that
condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.

14:23 and he that doubteth is damn if he eat, becaus he eateth not
of faith: for whatsoev is not of faith is sin.

15:1 We then that are strong ought to bear the infirm of the
weak, and not to pleas ourselves.

15:2 let everi one of us pleas hi neighbour for hi good to
edification.

15:3 for even christ pleas not himself; but, as it is written, the
reproach of them that reproach thee fell on me.

15:4 for whatsoev thing were written aforetim were written for our
learning, that we through patienc and comfort of the scriptur might
hav hope.

15:5 now the god of patienc and consol grant you to be
likemind one toward anoth accord to christ jesus: 15:6 that ye
may with one mind and one mouth glorifi god, even the father of our
lord jesu christ.

15:7 wherefor receiv ye one another, as christ also receiv us to
th glori of god.

15:8 now I say that jesu christ wa a minist of the circumcision
for the truth of god, to confirm the promis made unto the fathers:
15:9 and that the gentil might glorifi god for hi mercy; as it is
written, for thi caus I will confess to thee among the gentiles, and
s unto thi name.

15:10 and again he saith, rejoice, ye gentiles, with hi people.

15:11 and again, prais the lord, all ye gentiles; and laud him, all
y people.

15:12 and again, esaia saith, there shall be a root of jesse, and he
that shall rise to reign over the gentiles; in him shall the gentiles
trust.

15:13 now the god of hope fill you with all joy and peac in
believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the holy
ghost.

15:14 and I myself also am persuad of you, my brethren, that ye also
ar full of goodness, fill with all knowledge, abl also to admonish
on another.

15:15 nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldli unto you
in some sort, as put you in mind, becaus of the grace that is
given to me of god, 15:16 that I should be the minist of jesus
christ to the gentiles, minist the gospel of god, that the
off up of the gentil might be acceptable, be sanctifi by
th holi ghost.

15:17 I have therefor whereof I may glori through jesu christ in
thos thing which pertain to god.

15:18 for I will not dare to speak of ani of those thing which christ
hath not wrought by me, to make the gentil obedient, by word and
deed, 15:19 through mighti sign and wonders, by the power of the
spirit of god; so that from jerusalem, and round about unto illyricum,
i have fulli preach the gospel of christ.

15:20 yea, so have I strive to preach the gospel, not where christ
wa named, lest I should build upon anoth man' foundation: 15:21
but as it is written, To whom he wa not spoken of, they shall see:
and they that have not heard shall understand.

15:22 for which caus also I have been much hinder from come to
you.

15:23 but now have no more place in these parts, and have a great
desir these mani year to come unto you; 15:24 whensoev I take my
journey into spain, I will come to you: for I trust to see you in my
journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be
somewhat fill with your company.

15:25 but now I go unto jerusalem to minist unto the saints.

15:26 for it hath pleas them of macedonia and achaia to make a
certain contribut for the poor saint which are at jerusalem.

15:27 It hath pleas them verily; and their debtor they are. for if
th gentil have been made partak of their spiritu things, their
duti is also to minist unto them in carnal things.

15:28 when therefor I have perform this, and have seal to them
thi fruit, I will come by you into spain.

15:29 and I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shall come in the
 of the bless of the gospel of christ.

15:30 now I beseech you, brethren, for the lord jesu christ' sake,
and for the love of the spirit, that ye strive togeth with me in
your prayer to god for me; 15:31 that I may be deliv from them
that do not believ in judaea; and that my servic which I have for
jerusalem may be accept of the saints; 15:32 that I may come unto
y with joy by the will of god, and may with you be refreshed.

15:33 now the god of peac be with you all. amen.

16:1 I commend unto you phebe our sister, which is a servant of the
church which is at cenchrea: 16:2 that ye receiv her in the lord, as
becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoev busi she
hath need of you: for she hath been a succour of many, and of myself
also.

16:3 greet priscilla and aquila my helper in christ jesus: 16:4 who
hav for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not onli I give
thanks, but also all the church of the gentiles.

16:5 likewis greet the church that is in their house. salut my
well-belov epaenetus, who is the firstfruit of achaia unto christ.

16:6 greet mary, who bestow much labour on us.

16:7 salut andronicu and junia, my kinsmen, and my fellow-prisoners,
who are of note among the apostles, who also were in christ befor me.

16:8 greet amplia my belov in the lord.

16:9 salut urbane, our helper in christ, and stachi my beloved.

16:10 salut apel approv in christ. salut them which are of
aristobulus' household.

16:11 salut herodion my kinsman. greet them that be of the household
of narcissus, which are in the lord.

16:12 salut tryphena and tryphosa, who labour in the lord. salut the
belov persis, which labour much in the lord.

16:13 salut rufu chosen in the lord, and hi mother and mine.

16:14 salut asyncritus, phlegon, hermas, patrobas, hermes, and the
brethren which are with them.

16:15 salut philologus, and julia, nereus, and hi sister, and
olympas, and all the saint which are with them.

16:16 salut one anoth with an holi kiss. the church of christ
salut you.

16:17 now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which caus divis and
off contrari to the doctrin which ye have learned; and avoid
them.

16:18 for they that are such serv not our lord jesu christ, but
their own belly; and by good word and fair speech deceiv the
heart of the simple.

16:19 for your obedi is come abroad unto all men. I am glad
therefor on your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that
which is good, and simpl concern evil.

16:20 and the god of peac shall bruis satan under your feet shortly.
th grace of our lord jesu christ be with you. amen.

16:21 timotheu my workfellow, and lucius, and jason, and sosipater,
mi kinsmen, salut you.

16:22 I tertius, who wrote thi epistle, salut you in the lord.

16:23 gaiu mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. erastus
th chamberlain of the citi saluteth you, and quartu a brother.

16:24 the grace of our lord jesu christ be with you all. amen.

16:25 now to him that is of power to stablish you accord to my
gospel, and the preach of jesu christ, accord to the revelation
of the mystery, which wa kept secret sinc the world began, 16:26 but
now is made manifest, and by the scriptur of the prophets, according
to the command of the everlast god, made known to all nations
for the obedi of faith: 16:27 To god onli wise, be glori through
jesu christ for ever. amen.




th first epistl of paul the apostl to the corinthians


1:1 paul call to be an apostl of jesu christ through the will of
god, and sosthen our brother, 1:2 unto the church of god which is at
corinth, to them that are sanctifi in christ jesus, call to be
saints, with all that in everi place call upon the name of jesus
christ our lord, both their' and our's: 1:3 grace be unto you, and
peace, from god our father, and from the lord jesu christ.

1:4 I thank my god alway on your behalf, for the grace of god which
i given you by jesu christ; 1:5 that in everi thing ye are enriched
bi him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge; 1:6 even as the
testimoni of christ wa confirm in you: 1:7 So that ye come behind
in no gift; wait for the come of our lord jesu christ: 1:8 who
shal also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our lord jesu christ.

1:9 god is faithful, by whom ye were call unto the fellowship of his
son jesu christ our lord.

1:10 now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our lord jesus
christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divis among you; but that ye be perfectli join togeth in the
sam mind and in the same judgment.

1:11 for it hath been declar unto me of you, my brethren, by them
which are of the hous of chloe, that there are content among you.

1:12 now thi I say, that everi one of you saith, I am of paul; and i
of apollos; and I of cephas; and I of christ.

1:13 Is christ divided? wa paul crucifi for you? or were ye
bapt in the name of paul?  1:14 I thank god that I baptiz none
of you, but crispu and gaius; 1:15 lest ani should say that I had
bapt in mine own name.

1:16 and I baptiz also the household of stephanas: besides, I know
not whether I baptiz ani other.

1:17 for christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not
with wisdom of words, lest the cross of christ should be made of none
effect.

1:18 for the preach of the cross is to them that perish
foolishness; but unto us which are save it is the power of god.

1:19 for it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
wil bring to noth the understand of the prudent.

1:20 where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disput of
thi world? hath not god made foolish the wisdom of thi world?  1:21
for after that in the wisdom of god the world by wisdom knew not god,
it pleas god by the foolish of preach to save them that
believe.

1:22 for the jew requir a sign, and the greek seek after wisdom:
1:23 but we preach christ crucified, unto the jew a stumblingblock,
and unto the greek foolishness; 1:24 but unto them which are called,
both jew and greeks, christ the power of god, and the wisdom of god.

1:25 becaus the foolish of god is wiser than men; and the
weak of god is stronger than men.

1:26 for ye see your calling, brethren, how that not mani wise men
aft the flesh, not mani mighty, not mani noble, are called: 1:27 but
god hath chosen the foolish thing of the world to confound the wise;
and god hath chosen the weak thing of the world to confound the
th which are mighty; 1:28 and base thing of the world, and things
which are despised, hath god chosen, yea, and thing which are not, to
br to nought thing that are: 1:29 that no flesh should glori in
hi presence.

1:30 but of him are ye in christ jesus, who of god is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: 1:31
that, accord as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glori in
th lord.

2:1 and I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excel of
speech or of wisdom, declar unto you the testimoni of god.

2:2 for I determin not to know ani thing among you, save jesus
christ, and him crucified.

2:3 and I wa with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling.

2:4 and my speech and my preach wa not with entic word of
man' wisdom, but in demonstr of the spirit and of power: 2:5
that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
pow of god.

2:6 howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the
wisdom of thi world, nor of the princ of thi world, that come to
nought: 2:7 but we speak the wisdom of god in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom, which god ordain befor the world unto our glory: 2:8
which none of the princ of thi world knew: for had they known it,
they would not have crucifi the lord of glory.

2:9 but as it is written, eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither
hav enter into the heart of man, the thing which god hath prepared
for them that love him.

2:10 but god hath reveal them unto us by hi spirit: for the spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep thing of god.

2:11 for what man knoweth the thing of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? even so the thing of god knoweth no man, but the
spirit of god.

2:12 now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is of god; that we might know the thing that are freeli given
to us of god.

2:13 which thing also we speak, not in the word which man' wisdom
teacheth, but which the holi ghost teacheth; compar spiritual
th with spiritual.

2:14 but the natur man receiveth not the thing of the spirit of
god: for they are foolish unto him: neither can he know them,
becaus they are spiritu discerned.

2:15 but he that is spiritu judgeth all things, yet he himself is
judg of no man.

2:16 for who hath known the mind of the lord, that he may instruct
him?  but we have the mind of christ.

3:1 and I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but
a unto carnal, even as unto babe in christ.

3:2 I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were
not abl to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

3:3 for ye are yet carnal: for wherea there is among you envying, and
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?  3:4 for
whil one saith, I am of paul; and another, I am of apollos; are ye
not carnal?  3:5 who then is paul, and who is apollos, but ministers
bi whom ye believed, even as the lord gave to everi man?  3:6 I have
planted, apollo watered; but god gave the increase.

3:7 So then neither is he that planteth ani thing, neither he that
watereth; but god that giveth the increase.

3:8 now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and everi man
shal receiv hi own reward accord to hi own labour.

3:9 for we are labour togeth with god: ye are god' husbandry, ye
ar god' building.

3:10 accord to the grace of god which is given unto me, as a wise
masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and anoth buildeth
thereon. but let everi man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.

3:11 for other foundat can no man lay than that is laid, which is
jesu christ.

3:12 now if ani man build upon thi foundat gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble; 3:13 everi man' work shall be made
manifest: for the day shall declar it, becaus it shall be revealed
bi fire; and the fire shall tri everi man' work of what sort it is.

3:14 If ani man' work abid which he hath built thereupon, he shall
rec a reward.

3:15 If ani man' work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

3:16 know ye not that ye are the templ of god, and that the spirit of
god dwelleth in you?  3:17 If ani man defil the templ of god, him
shal god destroy; for the templ of god is holy, which templ ye are.

3:18 let no man deceiv himself. If ani man among you seemeth to be
wis in thi world, let him becom a fool, that he may be wise.

3:19 for the wisdom of thi world is foolish with god. for it is
written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.

3:20 and again, the lord knoweth the thought of the wise, that they
ar vain.

3:21 therefor let no man glori in men. for all thing are your's;
3:22 whether paul, or apollos, or cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or thing present, or thing to come; all are your's; 3:23 and
y are christ's; and christ is god's.

4:1 let a man so account of us, as of the minist of christ, and
steward of the mysteri of god.

4:2 moreov it is requir in stewards, that a man be found faithful.

4:3 but with me it is a veri small thing that I should be judg of
you, or of man' judgment: yea, I judg not mine own self.

4:4 for I know noth by myself; yet am I not herebi justified: but
h that judgeth me is the lord.

4:5 therefor judg noth befor the time, until the lord come, who
both will bring to light the hidden thing of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsel of the hearts: and then shall everi man have
prais of god.

4:6 and these things, brethren, I have in a figur transfer to
myself and to apollo for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to
think of men abov that which is written, that no one of you be puffed
up for one against another.

4:7 for who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou
that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receiv it, whi dost
thou glory, as if thou hadst not receiv it?  4:8 now ye are full,
now ye are rich, ye have reign as king without us: and I would to
god ye did reign, that we also might reign with you.

4:9 for I think that god hath set forth us the apostl last, as it
wer appoint to death: for we are made a spectacl unto the world,
and to angels, and to men.

4:10 We are fool for christ' sake, but ye are wise in christ; we are
weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised.

4:11 even unto thi present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are
naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwellingplace; 4:12 and
labour, work with our own hands: be reviled, we bless; being
persecuted, we suffer it: 4:13 be defamed, we intreat: we are made
a the filth of the world, and are the offscour of all thing unto
thi day.

4:14 I write not these thing to shame you, but as my belov son i
warn you.

4:15 for though ye have ten thousand instruct in christ, yet have
y not mani fathers: for in christ jesu I have begotten you through
th gospel.

4:16 wherefor I beseech you, be ye follow of me.

4:17 for thi caus have I sent unto you timotheus, who is my beloved
son, and faith in the lord, who shall bring you into remembr of
mi way which be in christ, as I teach everi where in everi church.

4:18 now some are puf up, as though I would not come to you.

4:19 but I will come to you shortly, if the lord will, and will know,
not the speech of them which are puf up, but the power.

4:20 for the kingdom of god is not in word, but in power.

4:21 what will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and
in the spirit of meekness?  5:1 It is report commonli that there is
forn among you, and such fornic as is not so much as named
among the gentiles, that one should have hi father' wife.

5:2 and ye are puf up, and have not rather mourned, that he that
hath done thi deed might be taken away from among you.

5:3 for I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have
judg already, as though I were present, concern him that hath so
don thi deed, 5:4 In the name of our lord jesu christ, when ye are
gath together, and my spirit, with the power of our lord jesus
christ, 5:5 To deliv such an one unto satan for the destruct of
th flesh, that the spirit may be save in the day of the lord jesus.

5:6 your glori is not good. know ye not that a littl leaven
leaveneth the whole lump?  5:7 purg out therefor the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. for even christ our
passov is sacrif for us: 5:8 therefor let us keep the feast,
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malic and wickedness;
but with the unleaven bread of sincer and truth.

5:9 I wrote unto you in an epistl not to compani with fornicators:
5:10 yet not altogeth with the fornic of thi world, or with
th covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye
ne go out of the world.

5:11 but now I have written unto you not to keep company, if ani man
that is call a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater,
or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not
to eat.

5:12 for what have I to do to judg them also that are without? do not
y judg them that are within?  5:13 but them that are without god
judgeth. therefor put away from among yourselv that wick person.

6:1 dare ani of you, have a matter against another, go to law before
th unjust, and not befor the saints?  6:2 Do ye not know that the
saint shall judg the world? and if the world shall be judg by you,
ar ye unworthi to judg the smallest matters?  6:3 know ye not that
w shall judg angels? how much more thing that pertain to thi life?
6:4 If then ye have judgment of thing pertain to thi life, set
them to judg who are least esteem in the church.

6:5 I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man
among you? no, not one that shall be abl to judg between his
brethren?  6:6 but brother goeth to law with brother, and that before
th unbelievers.

6:7 now therefor there is utterli a fault among you, becaus ye go to
law one with another. whi do ye not rather take wrong? whi do ye not
rath suffer yourselv to be defrauded?  6:8 nay, ye do wrong, and
defraud, and that your brethren.

6:9 know ye not that the unright shall not inherit the kingdom of
god?  Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abus of themselv with mankind,
6:10 nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of god.

6:11 and such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justifi in the name of the lord jesus, and by
th spirit of our god.

6:12 all thing are law unto me, but all thing are not expedient:
al thing are law for me, but I will not be brought under the
pow of any.

6:13 meat for the belly, and the belli for meats: but god shall
destroy both it and them. now the bodi is not for fornication, but for
th lord; and the lord for the body.

6:14 and god hath both rais up the lord, and will also rais up us
bi hi own power.

6:15 know ye not that your bodi are the member of christ? shall i
then take the member of christ, and make them the member of an
harlot? god forbid.

6:16 what? know ye not that he which is join to an harlot is one
body?  for two, saith he, shall be one flesh.

6:17 but he that is join unto the lord is one spirit.

6:18 flee fornication. everi sin that a man doeth is without the body;
but he that committeth fornic sinneth against hi own body.

6:19 what? know ye not that your bodi is the templ of the holi ghost
which is in you, which ye have of god, and ye are not your own?  6:20
for ye are bought with a price: therefor glorifi god in your body,
and in your spirit, which are god's.

7:1 now concern the thing whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for
a man not to touch a woman.

7:2 nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let everi man have hi own
wife, and let everi woman have her own husband.

7:3 let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise
also the wife unto the husband.

7:4 the wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and
likewis also the husband hath not power of hi own body, but the
wife.

7:5 defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a
time, that ye may give yourselv to fast and prayer; and come
togeth again, that satan tempt you not for your incontinency.

7:6 but I speak thi by permission, and not of commandment.

7:7 for I would that all men were even as I myself. but everi man hath
hi proper gift of god, one after thi manner, and anoth after that.

7:8 I say therefor to the unmarri and widows, It is good for them
if they abid even as i.

7:9 but if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to
marri than to burn.

7:10 and unto the marri I command, yet not I, but the lord, let not
th wife depart from her husband: 7:11 but and if she depart, let her
remain unmarri or be reconcil to her husband: and let not the
husband put away hi wife.

7:12 but to the rest speak I, not the lord: If ani brother hath a wife
that believeth not, and she be pleas to dwell with him, let him not
put her away.

7:13 and the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he
b pleas to dwell with her, let her not leav him.

7:14 for the unbeliev husband is sanctifi by the wife, and the
unbeliev wife is sanctifi by the husband: els were your children
unclean; but now are they holy.

7:15 but if the unbeliev depart, let him depart. A brother or a
sist is not under bondag in such cases: but god hath call us to
peace.

7:16 for what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy
husband?  or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy
wife?  7:17 but as god hath distribut to everi man, as the lord hath
cal everi one, so let him walk. and so ordain I in all churches.

7:18 Is ani man call be circumcised? let him not become
uncircumcised. Is ani call in uncircumcision? let him not be
circumcised.

7:19 circumcis is nothing, and uncircumcis is nothing, but the
keep of the command of god.

7:20 let everi man abid in the same call wherein he wa called.

7:21 art thou call be a servant? care not for it: but if thou
mayest be made free, use it rather.

7:22 for he that is call in the lord, be a servant, is the lord's
freeman: likewis also he that is called, be free, is christ's
servant.

7:23 Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servant of men.

7:24 brethren, let everi man, wherein he is called, therein abid with
god.

7:25 now concern virgin I have no command of the lord: yet i
giv my judgment, as one that hath obtain merci of the lord to be
faithful.

7:26 I suppos therefor that thi is good for the present distress, i
say, that it is good for a man so to be.

7:27 art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. art thou
loos from a wife? seek not a wife.

7:28 but and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin
marry, she hath not sinned. nevertheless such shall have troubl in
th flesh: but I spare you.

7:29 but thi I say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that
both they that have wive be as though they had none; 7:30 and they
that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoic not; and they that buy, as though they possess not;
7:31 and they that use thi world, as not abus it: for the fashion
of thi world passeth away.

7:32 but I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried
careth for the thing that belong to the lord, how he may pleas the
lord: 7:33 but he that is marri careth for the thing that are of
th world, how he may pleas hi wife.

7:34 there is differ also between a wife and a virgin. the
unmarri woman careth for the thing of the lord, that she may be
holi both in bodi and in spirit: but she that is marri careth for
th thing of the world, how she may pleas her husband.

7:35 and thi I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare
upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon
th lord without distraction.

7:36 but if ani man think that he behaveth himself uncom toward his
virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let
him do what he will, he sinneth not: let them marry.

7:37 nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in hi heart, have no
necessity, but hath power over hi own will, and hath so decre in
hi heart that he will keep hi virgin, doeth well.

7:38 So then he that giveth her in marriag doeth well; but he that
giveth her not in marriag doeth better.

7:39 the wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; but
if her husband be dead, she is at liberti to be marri to whom she
will; onli in the lord.

7:40 but she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: and i
think also that I have the spirit of god.

8:1 now as touch thing offer unto idols, we know that we all
hav knowledge. knowledg puffeth up, but chariti edifieth.

8:2 and if ani man think that he knoweth ani thing, he knoweth nothing
yet as he ought to know.

8:3 but if ani man love god, the same is known of him.

8:4 As concern therefor the eat of those thing that are
off in sacrific unto idols, we know that an idol is noth in
th world, and that there is none other god but one.

8:5 for though there be that are call gods, whether in heaven or in
earth, (a there be god many, and lord many,) 8:6 but to us there is
but one god, the father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and
on lord jesu christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

8:7 howbeit there is not in everi man that knowledge: for some with
consci of the idol unto thi hour eat it as a thing offer unto
an idol; and their conscienc be weak is defiled.

8:8 but meat commendeth us not to god: for neither, if we eat, are we
th better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse.

8:9 but take heed lest by ani mean thi liberti of your' becom a
stumblingblock to them that are weak.

8:10 for if ani man see thee which hast knowledg sit at meat in the
idol' temple, shall not the conscienc of him which is weak be
embolden to eat those thing which are offer to idols; 8:11 and
through thi knowledg shall the weak brother perish, for whom christ
died?  8:12 but when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their
weak conscience, ye sin against christ.

8:13 wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
whil the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend.

9:1 Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen jesu christ
our lord? are not ye my work in the lord?  9:2 If I be not an apostle
unto others, yet doubtless I am to you: for the seal of mine
apostleship are ye in the lord.

9:3 mine answer to them that do examin me is this, 9:4 have we not
pow to eat and to drink?  9:5 have we not power to lead about a
sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the
lord, and cephas?  9:6 Or I onli and barnabas, have not we power to
forbear working?  9:7 who goeth a warfar ani time at hi own charges?
who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who
feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?  9:8 say i
thes thing as a man? or saith not the law the same also?  9:9 for it
i written in the law of moses, thou shalt not muzzl the mouth of the
ox that treadeth out the corn. doth god take care for oxen?  9:10 or
saith he it altogeth for our sakes? for our sakes, no doubt, thi is
written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that
thresheth in hope should be partak of hi hope.

9:11 If we have sown unto you spiritu things, is it a great thing if
w shall reap your carnal things?  9:12 If other be partak of this
pow over you, are not we rather?  nevertheless we have not use this
power; but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of
christ.

9:13 Do ye not know that they which minist about holi thing live of
th thing of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are
partak with the altar?  9:14 even so hath the lord ordain that
they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.

9:15 but I have use none of these things: neither have I written
thes things, that it should be so done unto me: for it were better
for me to die, than that ani man should make my glori void.

9:16 for though I preach the gospel, I have noth to glori of: for
necess is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the
gospel!  9:17 for if I do thi thing willingly, I have a reward: but
if against my will, a dispens of the gospel is commit unto me.

9:18 what is my reward then? verili that, when I preach the gospel, i
may make the gospel of christ without charge, that I abus not my
pow in the gospel.

9:19 for though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant
unto all, that I might gain the more.

9:20 and unto the jew I becam as a jew, that I might gain the jews;
to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain
them that are under the law; 9:21 To them that are without law, as
without law, (be not without law to god, but under the law to
christ,) that I might gain them that are without law.

9:22 To the weak becam I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am
mad all thing to all men, that I might by all mean save some.

9:23 and thi I do for the gospel' sake, that I might be partaker
thereof with you.

9:24 know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one
receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain.

9:25 and everi man that striveth for the masteri is temper in all
things. now they do it to obtain a corrupt crown; but we an
incorruptible.

9:26 I therefor so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one
that beateth the air: 9:27 but I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection: lest that by ani means, when I have preach to others, i
myself should be a castaway.

10:1 moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how
that all our father were under the cloud, and all pass through the
sea; 10:2 and were all baptiz unto mose in the cloud and in the
sea; 10:3 and did all eat the same spiritu meat; 10:4 and did all
drink the same spiritu drink: for they drank of that spiritu rock
that follow them: and that rock wa christ.

10:5 but with mani of them god wa not well pleased: for they were
overthrown in the wilderness.

10:6 now these thing were our examples, to the intent we should not
lust after evil things, as they also lusted.

10:7 neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written,
th peopl sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

10:8 neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and
fel in one day three and twenti thousand.

10:9 neither let us tempt christ, as some of them also tempted, and
wer destroy of serpents.

10:10 neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroy of the destroyer.

10:11 now all these thing happen unto them for ensamples: and they
ar written for our admonition, upon whom the end of the world are
come.

10:12 wherefor let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he
fall.

10:13 there hath no temptat taken you but such as is common to man:
but god is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempt abov that
y are able; but will with the temptat also make a way to escape,
that ye may be abl to bear it.

10:14 wherefore, my dearli beloved, flee from idolatry.

10:15 I speak as to wise men; judg ye what I say.

10:16 the cup of bless which we bless, is it not the communion of
th blood of christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the bodi of christ?  10:17 for we be mani are one bread, and one
body: for we are all partak of that one bread.

10:18 behold israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the
sacrific partak of the altar?  10:19 what say I then? that the
idol is ani thing, or that which is offer in sacrific to idol is
ani thing?  10:20 but I say, that the thing which the gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrific to devils, and not to god: and I would not
that ye should have fellowship with devils.

10:21 Ye cannot drink the cup of the lord, and the cup of devils: ye
cannot be partak of the lord' table, and of the tabl of devils.

10:22 Do we provok the lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?
10:23 all thing are law for me, but all thing are not expedient:
al thing are law for me, but all thing edifi not.

10:24 let no man seek hi own, but everi man another' wealth.

10:25 whatsoev is sold in the shambles, that eat, ask no question
for conscienc sake: 10:26 for the earth is the lord's, and the
 thereof.

10:27 If ani of them that believ not bid you to a feast, and ye be
dispos to go; whatsoev is set befor you, eat, ask no question
for conscienc sake.

10:28 but if ani man say unto you, thi is offer in sacrific unto
idols, eat not for hi sake that shew it, and for conscienc sake:
for the earth is the lord's, and the ful thereof: 10:29
conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: for whi is my
liberti judg of anoth man' conscience?  10:30 for if I by grace
b a partaker, whi am I evil spoken of for that for which I give
thanks?  10:31 whether therefor ye eat, or drink, or whatsoev ye
do, do all to the glori of god.

10:32 give none offence, neither to the jews, nor to the gentiles, nor
to the church of god: 10:33 even as I pleas all men in all things,
not seek mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved.

11:1 Be ye follow of me, even as I also am of christ.

11:2 now I prais you, brethren, that ye rememb me in all things,
and keep the ordinances, as I deliv them to you.

11:3 but I would have you know, that the head of everi man is christ;
and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of christ is god.

11:4 everi man pray or prophesying, have hi head covered,
dishonoureth hi head.

11:5 but everi woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head
uncov dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if she
wer shaven.

11:6 for if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it
b a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.

11:7 for a man inde ought not to cover hi head, forasmuch as he is
th imag and glori of god: but the woman is the glori of the man.

11:8 for the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man.

11:9 neither wa the man creat for the woman; but the woman for the
man.

11:10 for thi caus ought the woman to have power on her head because
of the angels.

11:11 nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the
woman without the man, in the lord.

11:12 for as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the
woman; but all thing of god.

11:13 judg in yourselves: is it come that a woman pray unto god
uncovered?  11:14 doth not even natur itself teach you, that, if a
man have long hair, it is a shame unto him?  11:15 but if a woman have
long hair, it is a glori to her: for her hair is given her for a
covering.

11:16 but if ani man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neith the church of god.

11:17 now in thi that I declar unto you I prais you not, that ye
com togeth not for the better, but for the worse.

11:18 for first of all, when ye come togeth in the church, I hear
that there be divis among you; and I partli believ it.

11:19 for there must be also heresi among you, that they which are
approv may be made manifest among you.

11:20 when ye come togeth therefor into one place, thi is not to
eat the lord' supper.

11:21 for in eat everi one taketh befor other hi own supper: and
on is hungry, and anoth is drunken.

11:22 what? have ye not hous to eat and to drink in? or despis ye
th church of god, and shame them that have not? what shall I say to
you? shall I prais you in this? I prais you not.

11:23 for I have receiv of the lord that which also I deliv unto
you, that the lord jesu the same night in which he wa betray took
bread: 11:24 and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
take, eat: thi is my body, which is broken for you: thi do in
remembr of me.

11:25 after the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped,
saying, thi cup is the new testament in my blood: thi do ye, as oft
a ye drink it, in remembr of me.

11:26 for as often as ye eat thi bread, and drink thi cup, ye do
shew the lord' death till he come.

11:27 wherefor whosoev shall eat thi bread, and drink thi cup of
th lord, unworthily, shall be guilti of the bodi and blood of the
lord.

11:28 but let a man examin himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup.

11:29 for he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh
damn to himself, not discern the lord' body.

11:30 for thi caus mani are weak and sickli among you, and many
sleep.

11:31 for if we would judg ourselves, we should not be judged.

11:32 but when we are judged, we are chasten of the lord, that we
should not be condemn with the world.

11:33 wherefore, my brethren, when ye come togeth to eat, tarri one
for another.

11:34 and if ani man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not
togeth unto condemnation. and the rest will I set in order when i
come.

12:1 now concern spiritu gifts, brethren, I would not have you
ignorant.

12:2 Ye know that ye were gentiles, carri away unto these dumb
idols, even as ye were led.

12:3 wherefor I give you to understand, that no man speak by the
spirit of god calleth jesu accursed: and that no man can say that
jesu is the lord, but by the holi ghost.

12:4 now there are divers of gifts, but the same spirit.

12:5 and there are differ of administrations, but the same lord.

12:6 and there are divers of operations, but it is the same god
which worketh all in all.

12:7 but the manifest of the spirit is given to everi man to
profit withal.

12:8 for to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom; to another
th word of knowledg by the same spirit; 12:9 To anoth faith by the
sam spirit; to anoth the gift of heal by the same spirit; 12:10
to anoth the work of miracles; to anoth prophecy; to another
discern of spirits; to anoth diver kind of tongues; to another
th interpret of tongues: 12:11 but all these worketh that one
and the selfsam spirit, divid to everi man sever as he will.

12:12 for as the bodi is one, and hath mani members, and all the
memb of that one body, be many, are one body: so also is christ.

12:13 for by one spirit are we all baptiz into one body, whether we
b jew or gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all
mad to drink into one spirit.

12:14 for the bodi is not one member, but many.

12:15 If the foot shall say, becaus I am not the hand, I am not of
th body; is it therefor not of the body?  12:16 and if the ear shall
say, becaus I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore
not of the body?  12:17 If the whole bodi were an eye, where were the
hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?  12:18
but now hath god set the member everi one of them in the body, as it
hath pleas him.

12:19 and if they were all one member, where were the body?  12:20 but
now are they mani members, yet but one body.

12:21 and the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee:
nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

12:22 nay, much more those member of the body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary: 12:23 and those member of the body, which we
think to be less honourable, upon these we bestow more abundant
honour; and our uncom part have more abund comeliness.

12:24 for our come part have no need: but god hath temper the
bodi together, have given more abund honour to that part which
lacked.

12:25 that there should be no schism in the body; but that the members
should have the same care one for another.

12:26 and whether one member suffer, all the member suffer with it;
or one member be honoured, all the member rejoic with it.

12:27 now ye are the bodi of christ, and member in particular.

12:28 and god hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily
prophets, thirdli teachers, after that miracles, then gift of
healings, helps, governments, divers of tongues.

12:29 are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all
work of miracles?  12:30 have all the gift of healing? do all
speak with tongues? do all interpret?  12:31 but covet earnestli the
best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more excel way.

13:1 though I speak with the tongu of men and of angels, and have
not charity, I am becom as sound brass, or a tinkl cymbal.

13:2 and though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that i
could remov mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

13:3 and though I bestow all my good to feed the poor, and though i
giv my bodi to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
nothing.

13:4 chariti suffereth long, and is kind; chariti envieth not; charity
vaunteth not itself, is not puf up, 13:5 doth not behav itself
unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easili provoked, thinketh no
evil; 13:6 rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 13:7
beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth
al things.

13:8 chariti never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they
shal fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there
b knowledge, it shall vanish away.

13:9 for we know in part, and we prophesi in part.

13:10 but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away.

13:11 when I wa a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child,
i thought as a child: but when I becam a man, I put away childish
things.

13:12 for now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face:
now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.

13:13 and now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the
greatest of these is charity.

14:1 follow after charity, and desir spiritu gifts, but rather that
y may prophesy.

14:2 for he that speaketh in an unknown tongu speaketh not unto men,
but unto god: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he
speaketh mysteries.

14:3 but he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort.

14:4 He that speaketh in an unknown tongu edifieth himself; but he
that prophesieth edifieth the church.

14:5 I would that ye all spake with tongu but rather that ye
prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh
with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive
edifying.

14:6 now, brethren, if I come unto you speak with tongues, what
shal I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation,
or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?  14:7 and even
th without life give sound, whether pipe or harp, except they
giv a distinct in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped
or harped?  14:8 for if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepar himself to the battle?  14:9 So likewis ye, except ye utter
bi the tongu word easi to be understood, how shall it be known what
i spoken? for ye shall speak into the air.

14:10 there are, it may be, so mani kind of voic in the world, and
non of them is without signification.

14:11 therefor if I know not the mean of the voice, I shall be
unto him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a
barbarian unto me.

14:12 even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealou of spiritu gifts, seek
that ye may excel to the edifi of the church.

14:13 wherefor let him that speaketh in an unknown tongu pray that
h may interpret.

14:14 for if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my
understand is unfruitful.

14:15 what is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray
with the understand also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will
s with the understand also.

14:16 els when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that
occupieth the room of the unlearn say amen at thi give of thanks,
se he understandeth not what thou sayest?  14:17 for thou verily
givest thank well, but the other is not edified.

14:18 I thank my god, I speak with tongu more than ye all: 14:19 yet
in the church I had rather speak five word with my understanding,
that by my voic I might teach other also, than ten thousand word in
an unknown tongue.

14:20 brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malic be
y children, but in understand be men.

14:21 In the law it is written, with men of other tongu and other
lip will I speak unto thi people; and yet for all that will they not
hear me, saith the lord.

14:22 wherefor tongu are for a sign, not to them that believe, but
to them that believ not: but prophesi serveth not for them that
believ not, but for them which believe.

14:23 If therefor the whole church be come togeth into one place,
and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are
unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?  14:24
but if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or one
unlearned, he is convinc of all, he is judg of all: 14:25 and thus
ar the secret of hi heart made manifest; and so fall down on his
fac he will worship god, and report that god is in you of a truth.

14:26 how is it then, brethren? when ye come together, everi one of
you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation,
hath an interpretation. let all thing be done unto edifying.

14:27 If ani man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at
th most by three, and that by course; and let one interpret.

14:28 but if there be no interpreter, let him keep silenc in the
church; and let him speak to himself, and to god.

14:29 let the prophet speak two or three, and let the other judge.

14:30 If ani thing be reveal to anoth that sitteth by, let the
first hold hi peace.

14:31 for ye may all prophesi one by one, that all may learn, and all
may be comforted.

14:32 and the spirit of the prophet are subject to the prophets.

14:33 for god is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all
church of the saints.

14:34 let your women keep silenc in the churches: for it is not
permit unto them to speak; but they are command to be under
obedi as also saith the law.

14:35 and if they will learn ani thing, let them ask their husband at
home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.

14:36 what? came the word of god out from you? or came it unto you
only?  14:37 If ani man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual,
let him acknowledg that the thing that I write unto you are the
command of the lord.

14:38 but if ani man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

14:39 wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak
with tongues.

14:40 let all thing be done decent and in order.

15:1 moreover, brethren, I declar unto you the gospel which i
preach unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand;
15:2 By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memori what I preached
unto you, unless ye have believ in vain.

15:3 for I deliv unto you first of all that which I also received,
how that christ die for our sin accord to the scriptures; 15:4
and that he wa buried, and that he rose again the third day according
to the scriptures: 15:5 and that he wa seen of cephas, then of the
twelve: 15:6 after that, he wa seen of abov five hundr brethren at
once; of whom the greater part remain unto thi present, but some are
fallen asleep.

15:7 after that, he wa seen of james; then of all the apostles.

15:8 and last of all he wa seen of me also, as of one born out of due
time.

15:9 for I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called
an apostle, becaus I persecut the church of god.

15:10 but by the grace of god I am what I am: and hi grace which was
bestow upon me wa not in vain; but I labour more abundantli than
they all: yet not I, but the grace of god which wa with me.

15:11 therefor whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye
believed.

15:12 now if christ be preach that he rose from the dead, how say
som among you that there is no resurrect of the dead?  15:13 but
if there be no resurrect of the dead, then is christ not risen:
15:14 and if christ be not risen, then is our preach vain, and your
faith is also vain.

15:15 yea, and we are found fals wit of god; becaus we have
testifi of god that he rais up christ: whom he rais not up, if
so be that the dead rise not.

15:16 for if the dead rise not, then is not christ raised: 15:17 and
if christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins.

15:18 then they also which are fallen asleep in christ are perished.

15:19 If in thi life onli we have hope in christ, we are of all men
most miserable.

15:20 but now is christ risen from the dead, and becom the
firstfruit of them that slept.

15:21 for sinc by man came death, by man came also the resurrection
of the dead.

15:22 for as in adam all die, even so in christ shall all be made
alive.

15:23 but everi man in hi own order: christ the firstfruits;
afterward they that are christ' at hi coming.

15:24 then cometh the end, when he shall have deliv up the kingdom
to god, even the father; when he shall have put down all rule and all
author and power.

15:25 for he must reign, till he hath put all enemi under hi feet.

15:26 the last enemi that shall be destroy is death.

15:27 for he hath put all thing under hi feet. but when he saith all
th are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which
did put all thing under him.

15:28 and when all thing shall be subdu unto him, then shall the
son also himself be subject unto him that put all thing under him,
that god may be all in all.

15:29 els what shall they do which are baptiz for the dead, if the
dead rise not at all? whi are they then baptiz for the dead?  15:30
and whi stand we in jeopardi everi hour?  15:31 I protest by your
rejo which I have in christ jesu our lord, I die daily.

15:32 If after the manner of men I have fought with beast at ephesus,
what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink;
for to morrow we die.

15:33 Be not deceived: evil commun corrupt good manners.

15:34 awak to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the
knowledg of god: I speak thi to your shame.

15:35 but some man will say, how are the dead rais up? and with what
bodi do they come?  15:36 thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened, except it die: 15:37 and that which thou sowest, thou
sowest not that bodi that shall be, but bare grain, it may chanc of
wheat, or of some other grain: 15:38 but god giveth it a bodi as it
hath pleas him, and to everi seed hi own body.

15:39 all flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh
of men, anoth flesh of beasts, anoth of fishes, and anoth of
birds.

15:40 there are also celesti bodies, and bodi terrestrial: but the
glori of the celesti is one, and the glori of the terrestri is
another.

15:41 there is one glori of the sun, and anoth glori of the moon,
and anoth glori of the stars: for one star differeth from another
star in glory.

15:42 So also is the resurrect of the dead. It is sown in
corruption; it is rais in incorruption: 15:43 It is sown in
dishonour; it is rais in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised
in power: 15:44 It is sown a natur body; it is rais a spiritual
body. there is a natur body, and there is a spiritu body.

15:45 and so it is written, the first man adam wa made a live soul;
th last adam wa made a quicken spirit.

15:46 howbeit that wa not first which is spiritual, but that which is
natural; and afterward that which is spiritual.

15:47 the first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the
lord from heaven.

15:48 As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is
th heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.

15:49 and as we have born the imag of the earthy, we shall also bear
th imag of the heavenly.

15:50 now thi I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit
th kingdom of god; neither doth corrupt inherit incorruption.

15:51 behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we
shal all be changed, 15:52 In a moment, in the twinkl of an eye,
at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
rais incorruptible, and we shall be changed.

15:53 for thi corrupt must put on incorruption, and thi mortal
must put on immortality.

15:54 So when thi corrupt shall have put on incorruption, and
thi mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to
pass the say that is written, death is swallow up in victory.

15:55 O death, where is thi sting? O grave, where is thi victory?
15:56 the sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law.

15:57 but thank be to god, which giveth us the victori through our
lord jesu christ.

15:58 therefore, my belov brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable,
alway abound in the work of the lord, forasmuch as ye know that
your labour is not in vain in the lord.

16:1 now concern the collect for the saints, as I have given
ord to the church of galatia, even so do ye.

16:2 upon the first day of the week let everi one of you lay by him in
store, as god hath prosper him, that there be no gather when i
come.

16:3 and when I come, whomsoev ye shall approv by your letters,
them will I send to bring your liber unto jerusalem.

16:4 and if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me.

16:5 now I will come unto you, when I shall pass through macedonia:
for I do pass through macedonia.

16:6 and it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter with you, that
y may bring me on my journey whithersoev I go.

16:7 for I will not see you now by the way; but I trust to tarri a
whil with you, if the lord permit.

16:8 but I will tarri at ephesu until pentecost.

16:9 for a great door and effectu is open unto me, and there are
mani adversaries.

16:10 now if timotheu come, see that he may be with you without fear:
for he worketh the work of the lord, as I also do.

16:11 let no man therefor despis him: but conduct him forth in
peace, that he may come unto me: for I look for him with the brethren.

16:12 As touch our brother apollos, I greatli desir him to come
unto you with the brethren: but hi will wa not at all to come at
thi time; but he will come when he shall have conveni time.

16:13 watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.

16:14 let all your thing be done with charity.

16:15 I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the hous of stephanas, that
it is the firstfruit of achaia, and that they have addicted
themselv to the ministri of the saints,) 16:16 that ye submit
yourselv unto such, and to everi one that helpeth with us, and
laboureth.

16:17 I am glad of the come of stephana and fortunatu and
achaicus: for that which wa lack on your part they have supplied.

16:18 for they have refresh my spirit and your's: therefore
acknowledg ye them that are such.

16:19 the church of asia salut you. aquila and priscilla salut you
much in the lord, with the church that is in their house.

16:20 all the brethren greet you. greet ye one anoth with
an holi kiss.

16:21 the salut of me paul with mine own hand.

16:22 If ani man love not the lord jesu christ, let him be
anathema maranatha.

16:23 the grace of our lord jesu christ be with you.

16:24 My love be with you all in christ jesus. amen.




th second epistl of paul the apostl to the corinthians


1:1 paul, an apostl of jesu christ by the will of god, and timothy
our brother, unto the church of god which is at corinth, with all the
saint which are in all achaia: 1:2 grace be to you and peac from god
our father, and from the lord jesu christ.

1:3 bless be god, even the father of our lord jesu christ, the
fath of mercies, and the god of all comfort; 1:4 who comforteth us
in all our tribulation, that we may be abl to comfort them which are
in ani trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselv are comfort of
god.

1:5 for as the suffer of christ abound in us, so our consolation
also aboundeth by christ.

1:6 and whether we be afflicted, it is for your consol and
salvation, which is effectu in the endur of the same sufferings
which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your
consol and salvation.

1:7 and our hope of you is stedfast, knowing, that as ye are partakers
of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation.

1:8 for we would not, brethren, have you ignor of our troubl which
cam to us in asia, that we were press out of measure, above
strength, insomuch that we despair even of life: 1:9 but we had the
sent of death in ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves,
but in god which raiseth the dead: 1:10 who deliv us from so great
a death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver
us; 1:11 Ye also help togeth by prayer for us, that for the gift
bestow upon us by the mean of mani person thank may be given by
mani on our behalf.

1:12 for our rejoic is this, the testimoni of our conscience, that
in simplic and godli sincerity, not with fleshli wisdom, but by the
grac of god, we have had our convers in the world, and more
abundantli to you-ward.

1:13 for we write none other thing unto you, than what ye read or
acknowledge; and I trust ye shall acknowledg even to the end; 1:14 as
also ye have acknowledg us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even
a ye also are our' in the day of the lord jesus.

1:15 and in thi confid I wa mind to come unto you before, that
y might have a second benefit; 1:16 and to pass by you into
macedonia, and to come again out of macedonia unto you, and of you to
b brought on my way toward judaea.

1:17 when I therefor wa thu minded, did I use lightness? or the
th that I purpose, do I purpos accord to the flesh, that with
m there should be yea yea, and nay nay?  1:18 but as god is true, our
word toward you wa not yea and nay.

1:19 for the son of god, jesu christ, who wa preach among you by
us, even by me and silvanu and timotheus, wa not yea and nay, but in
him wa yea.

1:20 for all the promis of god in him are yea, and in him amen, unto
th glori of god by us.

1:21 now he which stablisheth us with you in christ, and hath anointed
us, is god; 1:22 who hath also seal us, and given the earnest of the
spirit in our hearts.

1:23 moreov I call god for a record upon my soul, that to spare you
i came not as yet unto corinth.

1:24 not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helper of
your joy: for by faith ye stand.

2:1 but I determin thi with myself, that I would not come again to
you in heaviness.

2:2 for if I make you sorry, who is he then that maketh me glad, but
th same which is made sorri by me?  2:3 and I wrote thi same unto
you, lest, when I came, I should have sorrow from them of whom I ought
to rejoice; have confid in you all, that my joy is the joy of
you all.

2:4 for out of much afflict and anguish of heart I wrote unto you
with mani tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know
th love which I have more abundantli unto you.

2:5 but if ani have caus grief, he hath not griev me, but in part:
that I may not overcharg you all.

2:6 suffici to such a man is thi punishment, which wa inflicted
of many.

2:7 So that contrariwis ye ought rather to forgiv him, and comfort
him, lest perhap such a one should be swallow up with overmuch
sorrow.

2:8 wherefor I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward
him.

2:9 for to thi end also did I write, that I might know the proof of
you, whether ye be obedi in all things.

2:10 To whom ye forgiv ani thing, I forgiv also: for if I forgave
ani thing, to whom I forgav it, for your sake forgav I it in the
person of christ; 2:11 lest satan should get an advantag of us: for
w are not ignor of hi devices.

2:12 furthermore, when I came to troa to preach christ' gospel, and
a door wa open unto me of the lord, 2:13 I had no rest in my
spirit, becaus I found not titu my brother: but take my leav of
them, I went from thenc into macedonia.

2:14 now thank be unto god, which alway causeth us to triumph in
christ, and maketh manifest the savour of hi knowledg by us in every
place.

2:15 for we are unto god a sweet savour of christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish: 2:16 To the one we are the savour of
death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. and
who is suffici for these things?  2:17 for we are not as many,
which corrupt the word of god: but as of sincerity, but as of god, in
th sight of god speak we in christ.

3:1 Do we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we, as some
others, epistl of commend to you, or letter of commendation
from you?  3:2 Ye are our epistl written in our hearts, known and
read of all men: 3:3 forasmuch as ye are manifestli declar to be the
epistl of christ minist by us, written not with ink, but with the
spirit of the live god; not in tabl of stone, but in fleshi tables
of the heart.

3:4 and such trust have we through christ to god-ward: 3:5 not that we
ar suffici of ourselv to think ani thing as of ourselves; but
our suffici is of god; 3:6 who also hath made us abl minist of
th new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the
lett killeth, but the spirit giveth life.

3:7 but if the ministr of death, written and engraven in stones,
wa glorious, so that the children of israel could not stedfastly
behold the face of mose for the glori of hi countenance; which glory
wa to be done away: 3:8 how shall not the ministr of the spirit
b rather glorious?  3:9 for if the ministr of condemn be
glory, much more doth the ministr of righteous exceed in
glory.

3:10 for even that which wa made gloriou had no glori in this
respect, by reason of the glori that excelleth.

3:11 for if that which is done away wa glorious, much more that which
remaineth is glorious.

3:12 see then that we have such hope, we use great plain of
speech: 3:13 and not as moses, which put a vail over hi face, that
th children of israel could not stedfastli look to the end of that
which is abolished: 3:14 but their mind were blinded: for until this
day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the read of the old
testament; which vail is done away in christ.

3:15 but even unto thi day, when mose is read, the vail is upon
their heart.

3:16 nevertheless when it shall turn to the lord, the vail shall be
taken away.

3:17 now the lord is that spirit: and where the spirit of the lord is,
ther is liberty.

3:18 but we all, with open face behold as in a glass the glori of
th lord, are chang into the same imag from glori to glory, even as
bi the spirit of the lord.

4:1 therefor see we have thi ministry, as we have receiv mercy,
w faint not; 4:2 but have renounc the hidden thing of dishonesty,
not walk in craftiness, nor handl the word of god deceitfully;
but by manifest of the truth commend ourselv to everi man's
consci in the sight of god.

4:3 but if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: 4:4 in
whom the god of thi world hath blind the mind of them which
believ not, lest the light of the gloriou gospel of christ, who is
th imag of god, should shine unto them.

4:5 for we preach not ourselves, but christ jesu the lord; and
ourselv your servant for jesus' sake.

4:6 for god, who command the light to shine out of darkness, hath
shin in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledg of the glory
of god in the face of jesu christ.

4:7 but we have thi treasur in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of god, and not of us.

4:8 We are troubl on everi side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in despair; 4:9 persecuted, but not forsaken; cast
down, but not destroyed; 4:10 alway bear about in the bodi the
di of the lord jesus, that the life also of jesu might be made
manifest in our body.

4:11 for we which live are alway deliv unto death for jesus' sake,
that the life also of jesu might be made manifest in our mortal
flesh.

4:12 So then death worketh in us, but life in you.

4:13 We have the same spirit of faith, accord as it is written, i
believed, and therefor have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore
speak; 4:14 know that he which rais up the lord jesu shall raise
up us also by jesus, and shall present us with you.

4:15 for all thing are for your sakes, that the abund grace might
through the thanksgiv of mani redound to the glori of god.

4:16 for which caus we faint not; but though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renew day by day.

4:17 for our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for
u a far more exceed and etern weight of glory; 4:18 while we
look not at the thing which are seen, but at the thing which are not
seen: for the thing which are seen are temporal; but the thing which
ar not seen are eternal.

5:1 for we know that if our earthli hous of thi tabernacl were
dissolved, we have a build of god, an hous not made with hands,
etern in the heavens.

5:2 for in thi we groan, earnestli desir to be cloth upon with
our hous which is from heaven: 5:3 If so be that be cloth we
shal not be found naked.

5:4 for we that are in thi tabernacl do groan, be burdened: not
for that we would be unclothed, but cloth upon, that mortal might
b swallow up of life.

5:5 now he that hath wrought us for the selfsam thing is god, who
also hath given unto us the earnest of the spirit.

5:6 therefor we are alway confident, know that, whilst we are at
hom in the body, we are absent from the lord: 5:7 (for we walk by
faith, not by sight:) 5:8 We are confident, I say, and will rather
to be absent from the body, and to be present with the lord.

5:9 wherefor we labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be
accept of him.

5:10 for we must all appear befor the judgment seat of christ; that
everi one may receiv the thing done in hi body, accord to that
h hath done, whether it be good or bad.

5:11 know therefor the terror of the lord, we persuad men; but we
ar made manifest unto god; and I trust also are made manifest in your
consciences.

5:12 for we commend not ourselv again unto you, but give you
occas to glori on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to answer
them which glori in appearance, and not in heart.

5:13 for whether we be besid ourselves, it is to god: or whether we
b sober, it is for your cause.

5:14 for the love of christ constraineth us; becaus we thu judge,
that if one die for all, then were all dead: 5:15 and that he died
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which die for them, and rose again.

5:16 wherefor henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though
w have known christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him
no more.

5:17 therefor if ani man be in christ, he is a new creature: old
th are pass away; behold, all thing are becom new.

5:18 and all thing are of god, who hath reconcil us to himself by
jesu christ, and hath given to us the ministri of reconciliation;
5:19 To wit, that god wa in christ, reconcil the world unto
himself, not imput their trespass unto them; and hath committed
unto us the word of reconciliation.

5:20 now then we are ambassador for christ, as though god did beseech
y by us: we pray you in christ' stead, be ye reconcil to god.

5:21 for he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we
might be made the righteous of god in him.

6:1 We then, as worker togeth with him, beseech you also that ye
rec not the grace of god in vain.

6:2 (for he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the
day of salvat have I succour thee: behold, now is the accepted
time; behold, now is the day of salvation.)  6:3 give no offenc in
ani thing, that the ministri be not blamed: 6:4 but in all things
approv ourselv as the minist of god, in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, 6:5 In stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings; 6:6
bi pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the holy
ghost, by love unfeigned, 6:7 By the word of truth, by the power of
god, by the armour of righteous on the right hand and on the left,
6:8 By honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report: as
deceivers, and yet true; 6:9 As unknown, and yet well known; as dying,
and, behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed; 6:10 As sorrowful,
yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet make mani rich; as have nothing,
and yet possess all things.

6:11 O ye corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is
enlarged.

6:12 Ye are not straiten in us, but ye are straiten in your own
bowels.

6:13 now for a recomp in the same, (I speak as unto my children,)
b ye also enlarged.

6:14 Be ye not unequ yoke togeth with unbelievers: for what
fellowship hath righteous with unrighteousness? and what communion
hath light with darkness?  6:15 and what concord hath christ with
belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?  6:16 and
what agreement hath the templ of god with idols? for ye are the
templ of the live god; as god hath said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them; and I will be their god, and they shall be my people.

6:17 wherefor come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the
lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receiv you.

6:18 and will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my son and
daughters, saith the lord almighty.

7:1 have therefor these promises, dearli beloved, let us cleanse
ourselv from all filthi of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holi in the fear of god.

7:2 receiv us; we have wrong no man, we have corrupt no man, we
hav defraud no man.

7:3 I speak not thi to condemn you: for I have said before, that ye
ar in our heart to die and live with you.

7:4 great is my bold of speech toward you, great is my glori of
you: I am fill with comfort, I am exceed joy in all our
tribulation.

7:5 for, when we were come into macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but
w were troubl on everi side; without were fightings, within were
fears.

7:6 nevertheless god, that comforteth those that are cast down,
comfort us by the come of titus; 7:7 and not by hi come only,
but by the consol wherewith he wa comfort in you, when he told
u your earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind toward me; so
that I rejoic the more.

7:8 for though I made you sorri with a letter, I do not repent, though
i did repent: for I perceiv that the same epistl hath made you
sorry, though it were but for a season.

7:9 now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed
to repentance: for ye were made sorri after a godli manner, that ye
might receiv damag by us in nothing.

7:10 for godli sorrow worketh repent to salvat not to be
rep of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.

7:11 for behold thi selfsam thing, that ye sorrow after a godly
sort, what care it wrought in you, yea, what clear of
yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement
desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! In all thing ye have
approv yourselv to be clear in thi matter.

7:12 wherefore, though I wrote unto you, I did it not for hi cause
that had done the wrong, nor for hi caus that suffer wrong, but
that our care for you in the sight of god might appear unto you.

7:13 therefor we were comfort in your comfort: yea, and exceedingly
th more joy we for the joy of titus, becaus hi spirit was
refresh by you all.

7:14 for if I have boast ani thing to him of you, I am not ashamed;
but as we spake all thing to you in truth, even so our boasting,
which I made befor titus, is found a truth.

7:15 and hi inward affect is more abund toward you, whilst he
remembereth the obedi of you all, how with fear and trembl ye
receiv him.

7:16 I rejoic therefor that I have confid in you in all things.

8:1 moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of god bestowed
on the church of macedonia; 8:2 how that in a great trial of
afflict the abund of their joy and their deep poverti abounded
unto the rich of their liberality.

8:3 for to their power, I bear record, yea, and beyond their power
they were will of themselves; 8:4 pray us with much intreaty
that we would receiv the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of the
minist to the saints.

8:5 and thi they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own
selv to the lord, and unto us by the will of god.

8:6 insomuch that we desir titus, that as he had begun, so he would
also finish in you the same grace also.

8:7 therefore, as ye abound in everi thing, in faith, and utterance,
and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us, see that
y abound in thi grace also.

8:8 I speak not by commandment, but by occas of the forward of
others, and to prove the sincer of your love.

8:9 for ye know the grace of our lord jesu christ, that, though he
wa rich, yet for your sake he becam poor, that ye through his
poverti might be rich.

8:10 and herein I give my advice: for thi is expedi for you, who
hav begun before, not onli to do, but also to be forward a year ago.

8:11 now therefor perform the do of it; that as there wa a
readi to will, so there may be a perform also out of that
which ye have.

8:12 for if there be first a will mind, it is accept accord to
that a man hath, and not accord to that he hath not.

8:13 for I mean not that other men be eased, and ye burdened: 8:14 but
bi an equality, that now at thi time your abund may be a supply
for their want, that their abund also may be a suppli for your
want: that there may be equality: 8:15 As it is written, He that had
gath much had noth over; and he that had gather littl had no
lack.

8:16 but thank be to god, which put the same earnest care into the
heart of titu for you.

8:17 for inde he accept the exhortation; but be more forward,
of hi own accord he went unto you.

8:18 and we have sent with him the brother, whose prais is in the
gospel throughout all the churches; 8:19 and not that only, but who
wa also chosen of the church to travel with us with thi grace,
which is administ by us to the glori of the same lord, and
declar of your readi mind: 8:20 avoid this, that no man should
blam us in thi abund which is administ by us: 8:21 providing
for honest things, not onli in the sight of the lord, but also in the
sight of men.

8:22 and we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes
prov dilig in mani things, but now much more diligent, upon the
great confid which I have in you.

8:23 whether ani do enquir of titus, he is my partner and
fellowhelp concern you: or our brethren be enquir of, they are
th messeng of the churches, and the glori of christ.

8:24 wherefor shew ye to them, and befor the churches, the proof of
your love, and of our boast on your behalf.

9:1 for as touch the minist to the saints, it is superfluous
for me to write to you: 9:2 for I know the forward of your mind,
for which I boast of you to them of macedonia, that achaia wa readi a
year ago; and your zeal hath provok veri many.

9:3 yet have I sent the brethren, lest our boast of you should be
in vain in thi behalf; that, as I said, ye may be ready: 9:4 lest
hapli if they of macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we
(that we say not, ye) should be asham in thi same confident
boasting.

9:5 therefor I thought it necessari to exhort the brethren, that they
would go befor unto you, and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof
y had notic before, that the same might be ready, as a matter of
bounty, and not as of covetousness.

9:6 but thi I say, He which soweth sparingli shall reap also
sparingly; and he which soweth bounti shall reap also
bountifully.

9:7 everi man accord as he purposeth in hi heart, so let him give;
not grudgingly, or of necessity: for god loveth a cheer giver.

9:8 and god is abl to make all grace abound toward you; that ye,
alway have all suffici in all things, may abound to everi good
work: 9:9 (a it is written, He hath dispers abroad; he hath given
to the poor: hi righteous remaineth for ever.

9:10 now he that ministereth seed to the sower both minist bread for
your food, and multipli your seed sown, and increas the fruit of
your righteousness;) 9:11 be enrich in everi thing to all
bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiv to god.

9:12 for the administr of thi servic not onli supplieth the
want of the saints, but is abund also by mani thanksgiv unto
god; 9:13 while by the experi of thi ministr they glorify
god for your profess subject unto the gospel of christ, and for
your liber distribut unto them, and unto all men; 9:14 and by
their prayer for you, which long after you for the exceed grace of
god in you.

9:15 thank be unto god for hi unspeak gift.

10:1 now I paul myself beseech you by the meek and gentl of
christ, who in presenc am base among you, but be absent am bold
toward you: 10:2 but I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am
pres with that confidence, wherewith I think to be bold against
some, which think of us as if we walk accord to the flesh.

10:3 for though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh:
10:4 (for the weapon of our warfar are not carnal, but mighty
through god to the pull down of strong holds;) 10:5 cast down
imaginations, and everi high thing that exalteth itself against the
knowledg of god, and bring into captiv everi thought to the
obedi of christ; 10:6 and have in a readi to reveng all
disobedience, when your obedi is fulfilled.

10:7 Do ye look on thing after the outward appearance? If ani man
trust to himself that he is christ's, let him of himself think this
again, that, as he is christ's, even so are we christ's.

10:8 for though I should boast somewhat more of our authority, which
th lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction,
i should not be ashamed: 10:9 that I may not seem as if I would
terrifi you by letters.

10:10 for hi letters, say they, are weighti and powerful; but his
bodili presenc is weak, and hi speech contemptible.

10:11 let such an one think this, that, such as we are in word by
lett when we are absent, such will we be also in deed when we are
present.

10:12 for we dare not make ourselv of the number, or compare
ourselv with some that commend themselves: but they measuring
themselv by themselves, and compar themselv among themselves,
ar not wise.

10:13 but we will not boast of thing without our measure, but
accord to the measur of the rule which god hath distribut to us,
a measur to reach even unto you.

10:14 for we stretch not ourselv beyond our measure, as though we
reach not unto you: for we are come as far as to you also in
preach the gospel of christ: 10:15 not boast of thing without
our measure, that is, of other men' labours; but have hope, when
your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarg by you accord to
our rule abundantly, 10:16 To preach the gospel in the region beyond
you, and not to boast in anoth man' line of thing made readi to
our hand.

10:17 but he that glorieth, let him glori in the lord.

10:18 for not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the
lord commendeth.

11:1 would to god ye could bear with me a littl in my folly: and
inde bear with me.

11:2 for I am jealou over you with godli jealousy: for I have
esp you to one husband, that I may present you as a chast virgin
to christ.

11:3 but I fear, lest by ani means, as the serpent beguil eve
through hi subtilty, so your mind should be corrupt from the
simpl that is in christ.

11:4 for if he that cometh preacheth anoth jesus, whom we have not
preached, or if ye receiv anoth spirit, which ye have not received,
or anoth gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with
him.

11:5 for I suppos I wa not a whit behind the veri chiefest apostles.

11:6 but though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have
been throughli made manifest among you in all things.

11:7 have I commit an offenc in abas myself that ye might be
exalted, becaus I have preach to you the gospel of god freely?
11:8 I rob other churches, take wage of them, to do you service.

11:9 and when I wa present with you, and wanted, I wa chargeabl to
no man: for that which wa lack to me the brethren which came from
macedonia supplied: and in all thing I have kept myself from being
burdensom unto you, and so will I keep myself.

11:10 As the truth of christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this
boast in the region of achaia.

11:11 wherefore? becaus I love you not? god knoweth.

11:12 but what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occas from
them which desir occasion; that wherein they glory, they may be found
even as we.

11:13 for such are fals apostles, deceit workers, transforming
themselv into the apostl of christ.

11:14 and no marvel; for satan himself is transform into an angel of
light.

11:15 therefor it is no great thing if hi minist also be
transform as the minist of righteousness; whose end shall be
accord to their works.

11:16 I say again, let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a
fool receiv me, that I may boast myself a little.

11:17 that which I speak, I speak it not after the lord, but as it
wer foolishly, in thi confid of boasting.

11:18 see that mani glori after the flesh, I will glori also.

11:19 for ye suffer fool gladly, see ye yourselv are wise.

11:20 for ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour
you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you
on the face.

11:21 I speak as concern reproach, as though we had been weak.
howbeit whereinsoev ani is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold
also.

11:22 are they hebrews? so am I. are they israelites? so am I. are
they the seed of abraham? so am i.

11:23 are they minist of christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in
labour more abundant, in stripe abov measure, in prison more
frequent, in death oft.

11:24 Of the jew five time receiv I forti stripe save one.

11:25 thrice wa I beaten with rods, onc wa I stoned, thrice i
suff shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep; 11:26
in journey often, in peril of waters, in peril of robbers, in
peril by mine own countrymen, in peril by the heathen, in peril in
th city, in peril in the wilderness, in peril in the sea, in perils
among fals brethren; 11:27 In weari and painfulness, in watchings
often, in hunger and thirst, in fast often, in cold and nakedness.

11:28 besid those thing that are without, that which cometh upon me
daily, the care of all the churches.

11:29 who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?
11:30 If I must need glory, I will glori of the thing which concern
min infirmities.

11:31 the god and father of our lord jesu christ, which is blessed
for evermore, knoweth that I lie not.

11:32 In damascu the governor under areta the king kept the citi of
th damascen with a garrison, desir to apprehend me: 11:33 and
through a window in a basket wa I let down by the wall, and escaped
hi hands.

12:1 It is not expedi for me doubtless to glory. I will come to
vis and revel of the lord.

12:2 I knew a man in christ abov fourteen year ago, (whether in the
body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: god
knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven.

12:3 and I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body,
i cannot tell: god knoweth;) 12:4 how that he wa caught up into
paradise, and heard unspeak words, which it is not law for a
man to utter.

12:5 Of such an one will I glory: yet of myself I will not glory, but
in mine infirmities.

12:6 for though I would desir to glory, I shall not be a fool; for i
wil say the truth: but now I forbear, lest ani man should think of me
abov that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me.

12:7 and lest I should be exalt abov measur through the abundance
of the revelations, there wa given to me a thorn in the flesh, the
messeng of satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalt above
measure.

12:8 for thi thing I besought the lord thrice, that it might depart
from me.

12:9 and he said unto me, My grace is suffici for thee: for my
strength is made perfect in weakness. most gladli therefor will i
rath glori in my infirmities, that the power of christ may rest upon
me.

12:10 therefor I take pleasur in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distress for christ' sake: for
when I am weak, then am I strong.

12:11 I am becom a fool in glorying; ye have compel me: for i
ought to have been commend of you: for in noth am I behind the
veri chiefest apostles, though I be nothing.

12:12 truli the sign of an apostl were wrought among you in all
patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighti deeds.

12:13 for what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches,
except it be that I myself wa not burdensom to you? forgiv me this
wrong.

12:14 behold, the third time I am readi to come to you; and I will not
b burdensom to you: for I seek not your' but you: for the children
ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parent for the children.

12:15 and I will veri gladli spend and be spent for you; though the
mor abundantli I love you, the less I be loved.

12:16 but be it so, I did not burden you: nevertheless, be crafty,
i caught you with guile.

12:17 did I make a gain of you by ani of them whom I sent unto you?
12:18 I desir titus, and with him I sent a brother. did titu make a
gain of you? walk we not in the same spirit? walk we not in the
sam steps?  12:19 again, think ye that we excus ourselv unto you?
w speak befor god in christ: but we do all things, dearli beloved,
for your edifying.

12:20 for I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as i
would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest
ther be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings,
swellings, tumults: 12:21 and lest, when I come again, my god will
humbl me among you, and that I shall bewail mani which have sinned
already, and have not repent of the unclean and fornic and
lascivi which they have committed.

13:1 thi is the third time I am come to you. In the mouth of two or
thre wit shall everi word be established.

13:2 I told you before, and foretel you, as if I were present, the
second time; and be absent now I write to them which heretofore
hav sinned, and to all other, that, if I come again, I will not
spare: 13:3 sinc ye seek a proof of christ speak in me, which to
you-ward is not weak, but is mighti in you.

13:4 for though he wa crucifi through weakness, yet he liveth by
th power of god. for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with
him by the power of god toward you.

13:5 examin yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own
selves. know ye not your own selves, how that jesu christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates?  13:6 but I trust that ye shall know that we
ar not reprobates.

13:7 now I pray to god that ye do no evil; not that we should appear
approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as
reprobates.

13:8 for we can do noth against the truth, but for the truth.

13:9 for we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this
also we wish, even your perfection.

13:10 therefor I write these thing be absent, lest be present
i should use sharpness, accord to the power which the lord hath
given me to edification, and not to destruction.

13:11 finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be
of one mind, live in peace; and the god of love and peac shall be
with you.

13:12 greet one anoth with an holi kiss.

13:13 all the saint salut you.

13:14 the grace of the lord jesu christ, and the love of god, and the
communion of the holi ghost, be with you all. amen.




th epistl of paul the apostl to the galatians


1:1 paul, an apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by jesus
christ, and god the father, who rais him from the dead;) 1:2 and all
th brethren which are with me, unto the church of galatia: 1:3
grace be to you and peac from god the father, and from our lord jesus
christ, 1:4 who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliv us
from thi present evil world, accord to the will of god and our
father: 1:5 To whom be glori for ever and ever. amen.

1:6 I marvel that ye are so soon remov from him that call you into
th grace of christ unto anoth gospel: 1:7 which is not another; but
ther be some that troubl you, and would pervert the gospel of
christ.

1:8 but though we, or an angel from heaven, preach ani other gospel
unto you than that which we have preach unto you, let him be
accursed.

1:9 As we said before, so say I now again, if ani man preach ani other
gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.

1:10 for do I now persuad men, or god? or do I seek to pleas men?
for if I yet pleas men, I should not be the servant of christ.

1:11 but I certifi you, brethren, that the gospel which wa preached
of me is not after man.

1:12 for I neither receiv it of man, neither wa I taught it, but by
th revel of jesu christ.

1:13 for ye have heard of my convers in time past in the jews'
religion, how that beyond measur I persecut the church of god, and
wast it: 1:14 and profit in the jews' religion abov mani my
equ in mine own nation, be more exceedingli zealou of the
tradit of my fathers.

1:15 but when it pleas god, who separ me from my mother' womb,
and call me by hi grace, 1:16 To reveal hi son in me, that I might
preach him among the heathen; immedi I confer not with flesh
and blood: 1:17 neither went I up to jerusalem to them which were
apostl befor me; but I went into arabia, and return again unto
damascus.

1:18 then after three year I went up to jerusalem to see peter, and
abod with him fifteen days.

1:19 but other of the apostl saw I none, save jame the lord's
brother.

1:20 now the thing which I write unto you, behold, befor god, I lie
not.

1:21 afterward I came into the region of syria and cilicia; 1:22 and
wa unknown by face unto the church of judaea which were in christ:
1:23 but they had heard only, that he which persecut us in times
past now preacheth the faith which onc he destroyed.

1:24 and they glorifi god in me.

2:1 then fourteen year after I went up again to jerusalem with
barnabas, and took titu with me also.

2:2 and I went up by revelation, and commun unto them that
gospel which I preach among the gentiles, but privat to them which
wer of reputation, lest by ani mean I should run, or had run, in
vain.

2:3 but neither titus, who wa with me, be a greek, wa compelled
to be circumcised: 2:4 and that becaus of fals brethren unawares
brought in, who came in privili to spi out our liberti which we have
in christ jesus, that they might bring us into bondage: 2:5 To whom we
gav place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the
gospel might continu with you.

2:6 but of these who seem to be somewhat, (whatsoev they were, it
maketh no matter to me: god accepteth no man' person:) for they who
seem to be somewhat in confer ad noth to me: 2:7 but
contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcis was
commit unto me, as the gospel of the circumcis wa unto peter;
2:8 (for he that wrought effectu in peter to the apostleship of
th circumcision, the same wa mighti in me toward the gentiles:) 2:9
and when james, cephas, and john, who seem to be pillars, perceived
th grace that wa given unto me, they gave to me and barnaba the
right hand of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and
they unto the circumcision.

2:10 onli they would that we should rememb the poor; the same which
i also wa forward to do.

2:11 but when peter wa come to antioch, I withstood him to the face,
becaus he wa to be blamed.

2:12 for befor that certain came from james, he did eat with the
gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separ himself,
fear them which were of the circumcision.

2:13 and the other jew dissembl likewis with him; insomuch that
barnaba also wa carri away with their dissimulation.

2:14 but when I saw that they walk not uprightli accord to the
truth of the gospel, I said unto peter befor them all, If thou, being
a jew, livest after the manner of gentiles, and not as do the jews,
whi compellest thou the gentil to live as do the jews?  2:15 We who
ar jew by nature, and not sinner of the gentiles, 2:16 know that
a man is not justifi by the work of the law, but by the faith of
jesu christ, even we have believ in jesu christ, that we might be
justifi by the faith of christ, and not by the work of the law: for
bi the work of the law shall no flesh be justified.

2:17 but if, while we seek to be justifi by christ, we ourselves
also are found sinners, is therefor christ the minist of sin? god
forbid.

2:18 for if I build again the thing which I destroyed, I make myself
a transgressor.

2:19 for I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto
god.

2:20 I am crucifi with christ: neverthless I live; yet not I, but
christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live
bi the faith of the son of god, who love me, and gave himself for me.

2:21 I do not frustrat the grace of god: for if righteous come by
th law, then christ is dead in vain.

3:1 O foolish galatians, who hath bewitch you, that ye should not
obey the truth, befor whose eye jesu christ hath been evid set
forth, crucifi among you?  3:2 thi onli would I learn of you,
receiv ye the spirit by the work of the law, or by the hear of
faith?  3:3 are ye so foolish? have begun in the spirit, are ye now
mad perfect by the flesh?  3:4 have ye suffer so mani thing in
vain? if it be yet in vain.

3:5 He therefor that ministereth to you the spirit, and worketh
miracl among you, doeth he it by the work of the law, or by the
hear of faith?  3:6 even as abraham believ god, and it was
account to him for righteousness.

3:7 know ye therefor that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of abraham.

3:8 and the scripture, forese that god would justifi the heathen
through faith, preach befor the gospel unto abraham, saying, in
the shall all nation be blessed.

3:9 So then they which be of faith are bless with faith abraham.

3:10 for as mani as are of the work of the law are under the curse:
for it is written, curs is everi one that continueth not in all
th which are written in the book of the law to do them.

3:11 but that no man is justifi by the law in the sight of god, it
i evident: for, the just shall live by faith.

3:12 and the law is not of faith: but, the man that doeth them shall
liv in them.

3:13 christ hath redeem us from the curs of the law, be made a
curs for us: for it is written, curs is everi one that hangeth on a
tree: 3:14 that the bless of abraham might come on the gentiles
through jesu christ; that we might receiv the promis of the spirit
through faith.

3:15 brethren, I speak after the manner of men; though it be but a
man' covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth
thereto.

3:16 now to abraham and hi seed were the promis made. He saith not,
and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thi seed, which is
christ.

3:17 and thi I say, that the covenant, that wa confirm befor of
god in christ, the law, which wa four hundr and thirti year after,
cannot disannul, that it should make the promis of none effect.

3:18 for if the inherit be of the law, it is no more of promise:
but god gave it to abraham by promise.

3:19 wherefor then serveth the law? It wa ad becaus of
transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promis was
made; and it wa ordain by angel in the hand of a mediator.

3:20 now a mediat is not a mediat of one, but god is one.

3:21 Is the law then against the promis of god? god forbid: for if
ther had been a law given which could have given life, verily
right should have been by the law.

3:22 but the scriptur hath conclud all under sin, that the promise
bi faith of jesu christ might be given to them that believe.

3:23 but befor faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto
th faith which should afterward be revealed.

3:24 wherefor the law wa our schoolmast to bring us unto christ,
that we might be justifi by faith.

3:25 but after that faith is come, we are no longer under a
schoolmaster.

3:26 for ye are all the children of god by faith in christ jesus.

3:27 for as mani of you as have been baptiz into christ have put on
christ.

3:28 there is neither jew nor greek, there is neither bond nor free,
ther is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in christ jesus.

3:29 and if ye be christ's, then are ye abraham' seed, and heirs
accord to the promise.

4:1 now I say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth
noth from a servant, though he be lord of all; 4:2 but is under
tutor and governor until the time appoint of the father.

4:3 even so we, when we were children, were in bondag under the
el of the world: 4:4 but when the ful of the time wa come,
god sent forth hi son, made of a woman, made under the law, 4:5 to
redeem them that were under the law, that we might receiv the
adopt of sons.

4:6 and becaus ye are sons, god hath sent forth the spirit of hi son
into your hearts, crying, abba, father.

4:7 wherefor thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son,
then an heir of god through christ.

4:8 howbeit then, when ye knew not god, ye did servic unto them which
bi natur are no gods.

4:9 but now, after that ye have known god, or rather are known of god,
how turn ye again to the weak and beggarli elements, whereunto ye
desir again to be in bondage?  4:10 Ye observ days, and months, and
times, and years.

4:11 I am afraid of you, lest I have bestow upon you labour in vain.

4:12 brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have
not injur me at all.

4:13 Ye know how through infirm of the flesh I preach the gospel
unto you at the first.

4:14 and my temptat which wa in my flesh ye despis not, nor
rejected; but receiv me as an angel of god, even as christ jesus.

4:15 where is then the blessed ye spake of? for I bear you record,
that, if it had been possible, ye would have pluck out your own
eyes, and have given them to me.

4:16 Am I therefor becom your enemy, becaus I tell you the truth?
4:17 they zealous affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude
you, that ye might affect them.

4:18 but it is good to be zealous affect alway in a good thing,
and not onli when I am present with you.

4:19 My littl children, of whom I travail in birth again until christ
b form in you, 4:20 I desir to be present with you now, and to
chang my voice; for I stand in doubt of you.

4:21 tell me, ye that desir to be under the law, do ye not hear the
law?  4:22 for it is written, that abraham had two sons, the one by a
bondmaid, the other by a freewoman.

4:23 but he who wa of the bondwoman wa born after the flesh; but he
of the freewoman wa by promise.

4:24 which thing are an allegory: for these are the two covenants;
th one from the mount sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is
agar.

4:25 for thi agar is mount sinai in arabia, and answereth to
jerusalem which now is, and is in bondag with her children.

4:26 but jerusalem which is abov is free, which is the mother of us
all.

4:27 for it is written, rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break
forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desol hath many
mor children than she which hath an husband.

4:28 now we, brethren, as isaac was, are the children of promise.

4:29 but as then he that wa born after the flesh persecut him that
wa born after the spirit, even so it is now.

4:30 nevertheless what saith the scripture? cast out the bondwoman and
her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son
of the freewoman.

4:31 So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of
th free.

5:1 stand fast therefor in the liberti wherewith christ hath made us
free, and be not entangl again with the yoke of bondage.

5:2 behold, I paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, christ
shal profit you nothing.

5:3 for I testifi again to everi man that is circumcised, that he is a
debtor to do the whole law.

5:4 christ is becom of no effect unto you, whosoev of you are
justifi by the law; ye are fallen from grace.

5:5 for we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteous by
faith.

5:6 for in jesu christ neither circumcis availeth ani thing, nor
uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love.

5:7 Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the
truth?  5:8 thi persuas cometh not of him that calleth you.

5:9 A littl leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

5:10 I have confid in you through the lord, that ye will be none
otherwis minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear hi judgment,
whosoev he be.

5:11 and I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, whi do I yet
suff persecution? then is the offenc of the cross ceased.

5:12 I would they were even cut off which troubl you.

5:13 for, brethren, ye have been call unto liberty; onli use not
liberti for an occas to the flesh, but by love serv one another.

5:14 for all the law is fulfil in one word, even in this; thou
shalt love thi neighbour as thyself.

5:15 but if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consum one of another.

5:16 thi I say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the
lust of the flesh.

5:17 for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against
th flesh: and these are contrari the one to the other: so that ye
cannot do the thing that ye would.

5:18 but if ye be led of the spirit, ye are not under the law.

5:19 now the work of the flesh are manifest, which are these;
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 5:20 idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, 5:21 envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such
like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time
past, that they which do such thing shall not inherit the kingdom of
god.

5:22 but the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, 5:23 meekness, temperance: against such
ther is no law.

5:24 and they that are christ' have crucifi the flesh with the
affect and lusts.

5:25 If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit.

5:26 let us not be desir of vain glory, provok one another,
envi one another.

6:1 brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual, restor such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering
thyself, lest thou also be tempted.

6:2 bear ye one another' burdens, and so fulfil the law of christ.

6:3 for if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
deceiveth himself.

6:4 but let everi man prove hi own work, and then shall he have
rejo in himself alone, and not in another.

6:5 for everi man shall bear hi own burden.

6:6 let him that is taught in the word commun unto him that
teacheth in all good things.

6:7 Be not deceived; god is not mocked: for whatsoev a man soweth,
that shall he also reap.

6:8 for he that soweth to hi flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit shall of the spirit reap
lif everlasting.

6:9 and let us not be weari in well doing: for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.

6:10 As we have therefor opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especi unto them who are of the household of faith.

6:11 Ye see how larg a letter I have written unto you with mine own
hand.

6:12 As mani as desir to make a fair shew in the flesh, they
constrain you to be circumcised; onli lest they should suffer
persecut for the cross of christ.

6:13 for neither they themselv who are circumcis keep the law; but
desir to have you circumcised, that they may glori in your flesh.

6:14 but god forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our lord
jesu christ, by whom the world is crucifi unto me, and I unto the
world.

6:15 for in christ jesu neither circumcis availeth ani thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

6:16 and as mani as walk accord to thi rule, peac be on them, and
mercy, and upon the israel of god.

6:17 from henceforth let no man troubl me: for I bear in my bodi the
mark of the lord jesus.

6:18 brethren, the grace of our lord jesu christ be with your spirit.

amen.




th epistl of paul the apostl to the ephesians


1:1 paul, an apostl of jesu christ by the will of god, to the
saint which are at ephesus, and to the faith in christ jesus:
1:2 grace be to you, and peace, from god our father, and from the lord
jesu christ.

1:3 bless be the god and father of our lord jesu christ, who hath
bless us with all spiritu bless in heavenli place in christ:
1:4 accord as he hath chosen us in him befor the foundat of the
world, that we should be holi and without blame befor him in love:
1:5 have predestin us unto the adopt of children by jesus
christ to himself, accord to the good pleasur of hi will, 1:6 to
th prais of the glori of hi grace, wherein he hath made us accepted
in the beloved.

1:7 In whom we have redempt through hi blood, the forgiv of
sins, accord to the rich of hi grace; 1:8 wherein he hath
abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence; 1:9 have made known
unto us the mysteri of hi will, accord to hi good pleasur which
h hath purpos in himself: 1:10 that in the dispens of the
 of time he might gather togeth in one all thing in christ,
both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him: 1:11 in
whom also we have obtain an inheritance, be predestinated
accord to the purpos of him who worketh all thing after the
counsel of hi own will: 1:12 that we should be to the prais of his
glory, who first trust in christ.

1:13 In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth,
th gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye
wer seal with that holi spirit of promise, 1:14 which is the
earnest of our inherit until the redempt of the purchased
possession, unto the prais of hi glory.

1:15 wherefor I also, after I heard of your faith in the lord jesus,
and love unto all the saints, 1:16 ceas not to give thank for you,
mak mention of you in my prayers; 1:17 that the god of our lord
jesu christ, the father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of
wisdom and revel in the knowledg of him: 1:18 the eye of your
understand be enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of
hi calling, and what the rich of the glori of hi inherit in
th saints, 1:19 and what is the exceed great of hi power to
us-ward who believe, accord to the work of hi mighti power,
1:20 which he wrought in christ, when he rais him from the dead, and
set him at hi own right hand in the heavenli places, 1:21 far above
al principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and everi name
that is named, not onli in thi world, but also in that which is to
come: 1:22 and hath put all thing under hi feet, and gave him to be
th head over all thing to the church, 1:23 which is hi body, the
 of him that filleth all in all.

2:1 and you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespass and sins;
2:2 wherein in time past ye walk accord to the cours of this
world, accord to the princ of the power of the air, the spirit
that now worketh in the children of disobedience: 2:3 among whom also
w all had our convers in time past in the lust of our flesh,
fulfil the desir of the flesh and of the mind; and were by
natur the children of wrath, even as others.

2:4 but god, who is rich in mercy, for hi great love wherewith he
lov us, 2:5 even when we were dead in sins, hath quicken us
togeth with christ, (bi grace ye are saved;) 2:6 and hath rais us
up together, and made us sit togeth in heavenli place in christ
jesus: 2:7 that in the age to come he might shew the exceed riches
of hi grace in hi kind toward us through christ jesus.

2:8 for by grace are ye save through faith; and that not of
yourselves: it is the gift of god: 2:9 not of works, lest ani man
should boast.

2:10 for we are hi workmanship, creat in christ jesu unto good
works, which god hath befor ordain that we should walk in them.

2:11 wherefor remember, that ye be in time past gentil in the
flesh, who are call uncircumcis by that which is call the
circumcis in the flesh made by hands; 2:12 that at that time ye
wer without christ, be alien from the commonwealth of israel, and
strang from the coven of promise, have no hope, and without
god in the world: 2:13 but now in christ jesu ye who sometim were
far off are made nigh by the blood of christ.

2:14 for he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down
th middl wall of partit between us; 2:15 have abolish in his
flesh the enmity, even the law of command contain in
ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making
peace; 2:16 and that he might reconcil both unto god in one bodi by
th cross, have slain the enmiti thereby: 2:17 and came and preached
peac to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh.

2:18 for through him we both have access by one spirit unto the
father.

2:19 now therefor ye are no more stranger and foreigners, but
fellowcitizen with the saints, and of the household of god; 2:20 and
ar built upon the foundat of the apostl and prophets, jesus
christ himself be the chief corner stone; 2:21 In whom all the
build fitli frame togeth groweth unto an holi templ in the
lord: 2:22 In whom ye also are build togeth for an habit of
god through the spirit.

3:1 for thi caus I paul, the prison of jesu christ for you
gentiles, 3:2 If ye have heard of the dispens of the grace of god
which is given me to you-ward: 3:3 how that by revel he made
known unto me the mystery; (a I wrote afor in few words, 3:4
whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledg in the mystery
of christ) 3:5 which in other age wa not made known unto the son of
men, as it is now reveal unto hi holi apostl and prophet by the
spirit; 3:6 that the gentil should be fellowheirs, and of the same
body, and partak of hi promis in christ by the gospel: 3:7
whereof I wa made a minister, accord to the gift of the grace of
god given unto me by the effectu work of hi power.

3:8 unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is thi grace
given, that I should preach among the gentil the unsearch riches
of christ; 3:9 and to make all men see what is the fellowship of the
mystery, which from the begin of the world hath been hid in god,
who creat all thing by jesu christ: 3:10 To the intent that now
unto the princip and power in heavenli place might be known
bi the church the manifold wisdom of god, 3:11 accord to the
etern purpos which he purpos in christ jesu our lord: 3:12 in
whom we have bold and access with confid by the faith of him.

3:13 wherefor I desir that ye faint not at my tribul for you,
which is your glory.

3:14 for thi caus I bow my knee unto the father of our lord jesus
christ, 3:15 Of whom the whole famili in heaven and earth is named,
3:16 that he would grant you, accord to the rich of hi glory, to
b strengthen with might by hi spirit in the inner man; 3:17 that
christ may dwell in your heart by faith; that ye, be root and
ground in love, 3:18 may be abl to comprehend with all saint what
i the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; 3:19 and to know
th love of christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled
with all the ful of god.

3:20 now unto him that is abl to do exceed abundantli abov all
that we ask or think, accord to the power that worketh in us, 3:21
unto him be glori in the church by christ jesu throughout all ages,
world without end. amen.

4:1 I therefore, the prison of the lord, beseech you that ye walk
worthi of the vocat wherewith ye are called, 4:2 with all lowliness
and meekness, with longsuffering, forbear one anoth in love; 4:3
endeavour to keep the uniti of the spirit in the bond of peace.

4:4 there is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are call in one
hop of your calling; 4:5 one lord, one faith, one baptism, 4:6 one
god and father of all, who is abov all, and through all, and in you
all.

4:7 but unto everi one of us is given grace accord to the measure
of the gift of christ.

4:8 wherefor he saith, when he ascend up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gift unto men.

4:9 (now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descend first
into the lower part of the earth?  4:10 He that descend is the same
also that ascend up far abov all heavens, that he might fill all
things.)  4:11 and he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and
some, evangelists; and some, pastor and teachers; 4:12 for the
perfect of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifi of the bodi of christ: 4:13 till we all come in the uniti of
th faith, and of the knowledg of the son of god, unto a perfect man,
unto the measur of the statur of the ful of christ: 4:14 that we
henceforth be no more children, toss to and fro, and carri about
with everi wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, wherebi they lie in wait to deceive; 4:15 but speak the
truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head,
even christ: 4:16 from whom the whole bodi fitli join togeth and
compact by that which everi joint supplieth, accord to the
effectu work in the measur of everi part, maketh increas of the
bodi unto the edifi of itself in love.

4:17 thi I say therefore, and testifi in the lord, that ye henceforth
walk not as other gentil walk, in the vaniti of their mind, 4:18
have the understand darkened, be alien from the life of
god through the ignor that is in them, becaus of the blind of
their heart: 4:19 who be past feel have given themselv over
unto lasciviousness, to work all unclean with greediness.

4:20 but ye have not so learn christ; 4:21 If so be that ye have
heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in jesus: 4:22
that ye put off concern the former convers the old man, which
i corrupt accord to the deceit lusts; 4:23 and be renew in
th spirit of your mind; 4:24 and that ye put on the new man, which
aft god is creat in righteous and true holiness.

4:25 wherefor put away lying, speak everi man truth with his
neighbour: for we are member one of another.

4:26 Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your
wrath: 4:27 neither give place to the devil.

4:28 let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour,
work with hi hand the thing which is good, that he may have to
giv to him that needeth.

4:29 let no corrupt commun proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minist grace unto
th hearers.

4:30 and griev not the holi spirit of god, wherebi ye are seal unto
th day of redemption.

4:31 let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil
speaking, be put away from you, with all malice: 4:32 and be ye kind
on to another, tenderhearted, forgiv one another, even as god for
christ' sake hath forgiven you.

5:1 Be ye therefor follow of god, as dear children; 5:2 and walk
in love, as christ also hath love us, and hath given himself for us
an offer and a sacrific to god for a sweetsmel savour.

5:3 but fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not
b onc name among you, as becometh saints; 5:4 neither filthiness,
nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather
giv of thanks.

5:5 for thi ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor
covet man, who is an idolater, hath ani inherit in the kingdom
of christ and of god.

5:6 let no man deceiv you with vain words: for becaus of these
th cometh the wrath of god upon the children of disobedience.

5:7 Be not ye therefor partak with them.

5:8 for ye were sometim darkness, but now are ye light in the lord:
walk as children of light: 5:9 (for the fruit of the spirit is in all
good and righteous and truth;) 5:10 prove what is acceptable
unto the lord.

5:11 and have no fellowship with the unfruit work of darkness, but
rath reprov them.

5:12 for it is a shame even to speak of those thing which are done of
them in secret.

5:13 but all thing that are reprov are made manifest by the light:
for whatsoev doth make manifest is light.

5:14 wherefor he saith, awak thou that sleepest, and aris from the
dead, and christ shall give thee light.

5:15 see then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
5:16 redeem the time, becaus the day are evil.

5:17 wherefor be ye not unwise, but understand what the will of
th lord is.

5:18 and be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be fill with
th spirit; 5:19 speak to yourselv in psalm and hymn and
spiritu songs, sing and make melodi in your heart to the lord;
5:20 give thank alway for all thing unto god and the father in
th name of our lord jesu christ; 5:21 submit yourselv one to
anoth in the fear of god.

5:22 wives, submit yourselv unto your own husbands, as unto the
lord.

5:23 for the husband is the head of the wife, even as christ is the
head of the church: and he is the saviour of the body.

5:24 therefor as the church is subject unto christ, so let the wives
b to their own husband in everi thing.

5:25 husbands, love your wives, even as christ also love the church,
and gave himself for it; 5:26 that he might sanctifi and cleans it
with the wash of water by the word, 5:27 that he might present it
to himself a gloriou church, not have spot, or wrinkle, or ani such
thing; but that it should be holi and without blemish.

5:28 So ought men to love their wive as their own bodies. He that
loveth hi wife loveth himself.

5:29 for no man ever yet hate hi own flesh; but nourisheth and
cherisheth it, even as the lord the church: 5:30 for we are member of
hi body, of hi flesh, and of hi bones.

5:31 for thi caus shall a man leav hi father and mother, and shall
b join unto hi wife, and they two shall be one flesh.

5:32 thi is a great mystery: but I speak concern christ and the
church.

5:33 nevertheless let everi one of you in particular so love hi wife
even as himself; and the wife see that she rever her husband.

6:1 children, obey your parent in the lord: for thi is right.

6:2 honour thi father and mother; which is the first command with
promise; 6:3 that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long
on the earth.

6:4 and, ye fathers, provok not your children to wrath: but bring
them up in the nurtur and admonit of the lord.

6:5 servants, be obedi to them that are your master accord to
th flesh, with fear and trembling, in singl of your heart, as
unto christ; 6:6 not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the
serv of christ, do the will of god from the heart; 6:7 with
good will do service, as to the lord, and not to men: 6:8 knowing
that whatsoev good thing ani man doeth, the same shall he receiv of
th lord, whether he be bond or free.

6:9 and, ye masters, do the same thing unto them, forbearing
threatening: know that your master also is in heaven; neither is
ther respect of person with him.

6:10 finally, my brethren, be strong in the lord, and in the power of
hi might.

6:11 put on the whole armour of god, that ye may be abl to stand
against the wile of the devil.

6:12 for we wrestl not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the ruler of the dark of
thi world, against spiritu wicked in high places.

6:13 wherefor take unto you the whole armour of god, that ye may be
abl to withstand in the evil day, and have done all, to stand.

6:14 stand therefore, have your loin girt about with truth, and
hav on the breastplat of righteousness; 6:15 and your feet shod
with the prepar of the gospel of peace; 6:16 abov all, taking
th shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be abl to quench all the
fieri dart of the wicked.

6:17 and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of god: 6:18 pray alway with all prayer and
suppl in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all
persever and supplic for all saints; 6:19 and for me, that
utter may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to
mak known the mysteri of the gospel, 6:20 for which I am an
ambassador in bonds: that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to
speak.

6:21 but that ye also may know my affairs, and how I do, tychicus, a
belov brother and faith minist in the lord, shall make known to
you all things: 6:22 whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose,
that ye might know our affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts.

6:23 peac be to the brethren, and love with faith, from god the
fath and the lord jesu christ.

6:24 grace be with all them that love our lord jesu christ in
sincerity.

amen.




th epistl of paul the apostl to the philippians


1:1 paul and timotheus, the servant of jesu christ, to all the
saint in christ jesu which are at philippi, with the bishop and
deacons: 1:2 grace be unto you, and peace, from god our father, and
from the lord jesu christ.

1:3 I thank my god upon everi remembr of you, 1:4 alway in every
pray of mine for you all make request with joy, 1:5 for your
fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now; 1:6 being
confid of thi veri thing, that he which hath begun a good work in
you will perform it until the day of jesu christ: 1:7 even as it is
meet for me to think thi of you all, becaus I have you in my heart;
inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defenc and confirm of
th gospel, ye all are partak of my grace.

1:8 for god is my record, how greatli I long after you all in the
bowel of jesu christ.

1:9 and thi I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledg and in all judgment; 1:10 that ye may approv thing that
ar excellent; that ye may be sincer and without offenc till the day
of christ.

1:11 be fill with the fruit of righteousness, which are by jesus
christ, unto the glori and prais of god.

1:12 but I would ye should understand, brethren, that the thing which
happen unto me have fallen out rather unto the further of the
gospel; 1:13 So that my bond in christ are manifest in all the
palace, and in all other places; 1:14 and mani of the brethren in the
lord, wax confid by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the
word without fear.

1:15 some inde preach christ even of envi and strife; and some also
of good will: 1:16 the one preach christ of contention, not sincerely,
suppos to add afflict to my bonds: 1:17 but the other of love,
know that I am set for the defenc of the gospel.

1:18 what then? notwithstanding, everi way, whether in pretence, or in
truth, christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice.

1:19 for I know that thi shall turn to my salvat through your
prayer, and the suppli of the spirit of jesu christ, 1:20 according
to my earnest expect and my hope, that in noth I shall be
ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also christ
shal be magnifi in my body, whether it be by life, or by death.

1:21 for to me to live is christ, and to die is gain.

1:22 but if I live in the flesh, thi is the fruit of my labour: yet
what I shall choos I wot not.

1:23 for I am in a strait betwixt two, have a desir to depart, and
to be with christ; which is far better: 1:24 nevertheless to abid in
th flesh is more need for you.

1:25 and have thi confidence, I know that I shall abid and
continu with you all for your further and joy of faith; 1:26 that
your rejoic may be more abund in jesu christ for me by my
com to you again.

1:27 onli let your convers be as it becometh the gospel of
christ: that whether I come and see you, or els be absent, I may hear
of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind
striv togeth for the faith of the gospel; 1:28 and in nothing
terrifi by your adversaries: which is to them an evid token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of god.

1:29 for unto you it is given in the behalf of christ, not onli to
believ on him, but also to suffer for hi sake; 1:30 have the same
conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me.

2:1 If there be therefor ani consol in christ, if ani comfort of
love, if ani fellowship of the spirit, if ani bowel and mercies, 2:2
fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, have the same love, being
of one accord, of one mind.

2:3 let noth be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness
of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.

2:4 look not everi man on hi own things, but everi man also on the
th of others.

2:5 let thi mind be in you, which wa also in christ jesus: 2:6 who,
b in the form of god, thought it not robberi to be equal with god:
2:7 but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and wa made in the like of men: 2:8 and be found in
fashion as a man, he humbl himself, and becam obedi unto death,
even the death of the cross.

2:9 wherefor god also hath highli exalt him, and given him a name
which is abov everi name: 2:10 that at the name of jesu everi knee
should bow, of thing in heaven, and thing in earth, and thing under
th earth; 2:11 and that everi tongu should confess that jesu christ
i lord, to the glori of god the father.

2:12 wherefore, my beloved, as ye have alway obeyed, not as in my
pres only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own
salv with fear and trembling.

2:13 for it is god which worketh in you both to will and to do of his
good pleasure.

2:14 Do all thing without murmur and disputings: 2:15 that ye may
b blameless and harmless, the son of god, without rebuke, in the
midst of a crook and pervers nation, among whom ye shine as lights
in the world; 2:16 hold forth the word of life; that I may rejoice
in the day of christ, that I have not run in vain, neither labour in
vain.

2:17 yea, and if I be offer upon the sacrific and servic of your
faith, I joy, and rejoic with you all.

2:18 for the same caus also do ye joy, and rejoic with me.

2:19 but I trust in the lord jesu to send timotheu shortli unto you,
that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state.

2:20 for I have no man likeminded, who will natur care for your
state.

2:21 for all seek their own, not the thing which are jesu christ's.

2:22 but ye know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he
hath serv with me in the gospel.

2:23 him therefor I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see
how it will go with me.

2:24 but I trust in the lord that I also myself shall come shortly.

2:25 yet I suppos it necessari to send to you epaphroditus, my
brother, and companion in labour, and fellowsoldier, but your
messenger, and he that minist to my wants.

2:26 for he long after you all, and wa full of heaviness, because
that ye had heard that he had been sick.

2:27 for inde he wa sick nigh unto death: but god had merci on him;
and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon
sorrow.

2:28 I sent him therefor the more carefully, that, when ye see him
again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.

2:29 receiv him therefor in the lord with all gladness; and hold
such in reputation: 2:30 becaus for the work of christ he wa nigh
unto death, not regard hi life, to suppli your lack of service
toward me.

3:1 finally, my brethren, rejoic in the lord. To write the same
th to you, to me inde is not grievous, but for you it is safe.

3:2 bewar of dogs, bewar of evil workers, bewar of the concision.

3:3 for we are the circumcision, which worship god in the spirit, and
rejoic in christ jesus, and have no confid in the flesh.

3:4 though I might also have confid in the flesh. If ani other man
thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more: 3:5
circumcis the eighth day, of the stock of israel, of the tribe of
benjamin, an hebrew of the hebrews; as touch the law, a pharisee;
3:6 concern zeal, persecut the church; touch the
right which is in the law, blameless.

3:7 but what thing were gain to me, those I count loss for christ.

3:8 yea doubtless, and I count all thing but loss for the excellency
of the knowledg of christ jesu my lord: for whom I have suffer the
loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win christ,
3:9 and be found in him, not have mine own righteousness, which is
of the law, but that which is through the faith of christ, the
right which is of god by faith: 3:10 that I may know him, and
th power of hi resurrection, and the fellowship of hi sufferings,
b made conform unto hi death; 3:11 If by ani mean I might
attain unto the resurrect of the dead.

3:12 not as though I had alreadi attained, either were already
perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which
also I am apprehend of christ jesus.

3:13 brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but thi one
th I do, forget those thing which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those thing which are before, 3:14 I press toward the mark
for the prize of the high call of god in christ jesus.

3:15 let us therefore, as mani as be perfect, be thu minded: and if
in ani thing ye be otherwis minded, god shall reveal even thi unto
you.

3:16 nevertheless, whereto we have alreadi attained, let us walk by
th same rule, let us mind the same thing.

3:17 brethren, be follow togeth of me, and mark them which walk
so as ye have us for an ensample.

3:18 (for mani walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
even weeping, that they are the enemi of the cross of christ: 3:19
whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glori is
in their shame, who mind earthli things.)  3:20 for our conversation
i in heaven; from whenc also we look for the saviour, the lord jesus
christ: 3:21 who shall chang our vile body, that it may be fashioned
lik unto hi gloriou body, accord to the work wherebi he is
abl even to subdu all thing unto himself.

4:1 therefore, my brethren dearli belov and long for, my joy and
crown, so stand fast in the lord, my dearli beloved.

4:2 I beseech euodias, and beseech syntyche, that they be of the same
mind in the lord.

4:3 and I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which
labour with me in the gospel, with clement also, and with other my
fellowlabourers, whose name are in the book of life.

4:4 rejoic in the lord alway: and again I say, rejoice.

4:5 let your moder be known unto all men. the lord is at hand.

4:6 Be care for nothing; but in everi thing by prayer and
suppl with thanksgiv let your request be made known unto
god.

4:7 and the peac of god, which passeth all understanding, shall keep
your heart and mind through christ jesus.

4:8 finally, brethren, whatsoev thing are true, whatsoev things
ar honest, whatsoev thing are just, whatsoev thing are pure,
whatsoev thing are lovely, whatsoev thing are of good report; if
ther be ani virtue, and if there be ani praise, think on these
things.

4:9 those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do: and the god of peac shall be with you.

4:10 but I rejoic in the lord greatly, that now at the last your
car of me hath flourish again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye
lack opportunity.

4:11 not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in
whatsoev state I am, therewith to be content.

4:12 I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every
wher and in all thing I am instruct both to be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.

4:13 I can do all thing through christ which strengtheneth me.

4:14 notwithstand ye have well done, that ye did commun with
mi affliction.

4:15 now ye philippian know also, that in the begin of the
gospel, when I depart from macedonia, no church commun with me
a concern give and receiving, but ye only.

4:16 for even in thessalonica ye sent onc and again unto my
necessity.

4:17 not becaus I desir a gift: but I desir fruit that may abound
to your account.

4:18 but I have all, and abound: I am full, have receiv of
epaphroditu the thing which were sent from you, an odour of a sweet
smell, a sacrific acceptable, wellpleas to god.

4:19 but my god shall suppli all your need accord to hi rich in
glori by christ jesus.

4:20 now unto god and our father be glori for ever and ever. amen.

4:21 salut everi saint in christ jesus. the brethren which are with
m greet you.

4:22 all the saint salut you, chiefli they that are of caesar's
household.

4:23 the grace of our lord jesu christ be with you all. amen.




th epistl of paul the apostl to the colossians


1:1  paul, an apostl of jesu christ by the will of god,
and timotheu our brother, 1:2  To the saint and faith brethren
in christ which are at colosse: grace be unto you, and peace,
from god our father and the lord jesu christ.

1:3  We give thank to god and the father of our lord jesu christ, praying
alway for you,
1:4  sinc we heard of your faith in christ jesus, and of the love which ye
hav to all the saints,
1:5  for the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard
befor in the word of the truth of the gospel;
1:6  which is come unto you, as it is in all the world; and bringeth forth
fruit, as it doth also in you, sinc the day ye heard of it, and knew the
grac of god in truth:
1:7  As ye also learn of epaphra our dear fellowservant, who is for you
a faith minist of christ;
1:8  who also declar unto us your love in the spirit.

1:9  for thi caus we also, sinc the day we heard it, do not ceas to
pray for you, and to desir that ye might be fill with the knowledg of his
wil in all wisdom and spiritu understanding;
1:10  that ye might walk worthi of the lord unto all pleasing, being
fruit in everi good work, and increas in the knowledg of god;
1:11  strengthen with all might, accord to hi gloriou power, unto
al patienc and longsuff with joyfulness;
1:12  give thank unto the father, which hath made us meet to be
partak of the inherit of the saint in light:
1:13  who hath deliv us from the power of darkness, and hath translated
u into the kingdom of hi dear son:
1:14  In whom we have redempt through hi blood, even the forgiv of
sins:
1:15  who is the imag of the invis god, the firstborn of every
creature:
1:16  for by him were all thing created, that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visibl and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all thing were creat by him, and for him:
1:17  and he is befor all things, and by him all thing consist.

1:18  and he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the
firstborn from the dead; that in all thing he might have the preeminence.

1:19  for it pleas the father that in him should all ful dwell;
1:20  and, have made peac through the blood of hi cross, by him to
reconcil all thing unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be thing in
earth, or thing in heaven.

1:21  and you, that were sometim alien and enemi in your mind by
wick works, yet now hath he reconciled
1:22  In the bodi of hi flesh through death, to present you holi and
unblam and unreprov in hi sight:
1:23  If ye continu in the faith ground and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which wa preached
to everi creatur which is under heaven; whereof I paul am made a minister;
1:24  who now rejoic in my suffer for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflict of christ in my flesh for hi body' sake, which is
th church:
1:25  whereof I am made a minister, accord to the dispens of god
which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of god;
1:26  even the mysteri which hath been hid from age and from generations,
but now is made manifest to hi saints:
1:27  To whom god would make known what is the rich of the glori of this
mysteri among the gentiles; which is christ in you, the hope of glory:
1:28  whom we preach, warn everi man, and teach everi man in all
wisdom; that we may present everi man perfect in christ jesus:
1:29  whereunto I also labour, strive accord to hi working, which
worketh in me mightily.

2:1  for I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for
them at laodicea, and for as mani as have not seen my face in the flesh;
2:2  that their heart might be comforted, be knit togeth in love, and
unto all rich of the full assur of understanding, to the
acknowledg of the mysteri of god, and of the father, and of christ;
2:3  In whom are hid all the treasur of wisdom and knowledge.

2:4  and thi I say, lest ani man should beguil you with entic words.

2:5  for though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
joy and behold your order, and the stedfast of your faith in
christ.

2:6  As ye have therefor receiv christ jesu the lord, so walk ye in
him:
2:7  root and built up in him, and stablish in the faith, as ye have
been taught, abound therein with thanksgiving.

2:8  bewar lest ani man spoil you through philosophi and vain deceit,
aft the tradit of men, after the rudiment of the world, and not after
christ.

2:9  for in him dwelleth all the ful of the godhead bodily.

2:10  and ye are complet in him, which is the head of all princip and
power:
2:11  In whom also ye are circumcis with the circumcis made without
hands, in put off the bodi of the sin of the flesh by the circumcision
of christ:
2:12  buri with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him
through the faith of the oper of god, who hath rais him from the dead.

2:13  and you, be dead in your sin and the uncircumcis of your
flesh, hath he quicken togeth with him, have forgiven you all
trespasses;
2:14  blot out the handwrit of ordin that wa against us, which
wa contrari to us, and took it out of the way, nail it to hi cross;
2:15  and have spoil princip and powers, he made a shew of them
openly, triumph over them in it.

2:16  let no man therefor judg you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of
an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days:
2:17  which are a shadow of thing to come; but the bodi is of christ.

2:18  let no man beguil you of your reward in a voluntari humil and
worship of angels, intrud into those thing which he hath not seen,
vainli puf up by hi fleshli mind,
2:19  and not hold the head, from which all the bodi by joint and bands
hav nourish ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the
increas of god.

2:20  wherefor if ye be dead with christ from the rudiment of the world,
why, as though live in the world, are ye subject to ordinances,
2:21  (touch not; tast not; handl not;
2:22  which all are to perish with the using;) after the command and
doctrin of men?
2:23  which thing have inde a shew of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and neglect of the body: not in ani honour to the satisfying
of the flesh.

3:1  If ye then be risen with christ, seek those thing which are above,
wher christ sitteth on the right hand of god.

3:2  set your affect on thing above, not on thing on the earth.

3:3  for ye are dead, and your life is hid with christ in god.

3:4  when christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.

3:5  mortifi therefor your member which are upon the earth; fornication,
uncleanness, inordin affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness,
which is idolatry:
3:6  for which things' sake the wrath of god cometh on the children of
disobedience:
3:7  In the which ye also walk some time, when ye live in them.

3:8  but now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy,
filthi commun out of your mouth.

3:9  lie not one to another, see that ye have put off the old man with
hi deeds;
3:10  and have put on the new man, which is renew in knowledg after the
imag of him that creat him:
3:11  where there is neither greek nor jew, circumcis nor
uncircumcision, barbarian, scythian, bond nor free: but christ is all, and in
all.

3:12  put on therefore, as the elect of god, holi and beloved, bowel of
mercies, kindness, humbl of mind, meekness, longsuffering;
3:13  forbear one another, and forgiv one another, if ani man have a
quarrel against any: even as christ forgav you, so also do ye.

3:14  and abov all these thing put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness.

3:15  and let the peac of god rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
ar call in one body; and be ye thankful.

3:16  let the word of christ dwell in you richli in all wisdom; teaching
and admonish one anoth in psalm and hymn and spiritu songs, singing
with grace in your heart to the lord.

3:17  and whatsoev ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the lord
jesus, give thank to god and the father by him.

3:18  wives, submit yourselv unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the
lord.

3:19  husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.

3:20  children, obey your parent in all things: for thi is well pleasing
unto the lord.

3:21  fathers, provok not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged.

3:22  servants, obey in all thing your master accord to the flesh; not
with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singl of heart, fear god;
3:23  and whatsoev ye do, do it heartily, as to the lord, and not unto
men;
3:24  know that of the lord ye shall receiv the reward of the
inheritance: for ye serv the lord christ.

3:25  but he that doeth wrong shall receiv for the wrong which he hath
done: and there is no respect of persons.

4:1  masters, give unto your servant that which is just and equal; knowing
that ye also have a master in heaven.

4:2  continu in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving;
4:3  withal pray also for us, that god would open unto us a door of
utterance, to speak the mysteri of christ, for which I am also in bonds:
4:4  that I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.

4:5  walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeem the time.

4:6  let your speech be alway with grace, season with salt, that ye may
know how ye ought to answer everi man.

4:7  all my state shall tychicu declar unto you, who is a beloved
brother, and a faith minist and fellowserv in the lord:
4:8  whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know
your estate, and comfort your hearts;
4:9  with onesimus, a faith and belov brother, who is one of you. they
shal make known unto you all thing which are done here.

4:10  aristarchu my fellowprison saluteth you, and marcus, sister' son
to barnabas, (touch whom ye receiv commandments: if he come unto you,
rec him;)
4:11  and jesus, which is call justus, who are of the circumcision. these
onli are my fellowwork unto the kingdom of god, which have been a comfort
unto me.

4:12  epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of christ, saluteth you,
alway labour fervent for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
complet in all the will of god.

4:13  for I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them
that are in laodicea, and them in hierapolis.

4:14  luke, the belov physician, and demas, greet you.

4:15  salut the brethren which are in laodicea, and nymphas, and the
church which is in hi house.

4:16  and when thi epistl is read among you, caus that it be read also
in the church of the laodiceans; and that ye likewis read the epistl from
laodicea.

4:17  and say to archippus, take heed to the ministri which thou hast
receiv in the lord, that thou fulfil it.

4:18  the salut by the hand of me paul. rememb my bonds. grace be
with you. amen.




th first epistl of paul the apostl to the thessalonians


1:1 paul, and silvanus, and timotheus, unto the church of the
thessalonian which is in god the father and in the lord jesu christ:
grac be unto you, and peace, from god our father, and the lord jesus
christ.

1:2 We give thank to god alway for you all, make mention of you in
our prayers; 1:3 rememb without ceas your work of faith, and
labour of love, and patienc of hope in our lord jesu christ, in the
sight of god and our father; 1:4 knowing, brethren beloved, your
elect of god.

1:5 for our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power,
and in the holi ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner
of men we were among you for your sake.

1:6 and ye becam follow of us, and of the lord, have received
th word in much affliction, with joy of the holi ghost.

1:7 So that ye were ensampl to all that believ in macedonia and
achaia.

1:8 for from you sound out the word of the lord not onli in
macedonia and achaia, but also in everi place your faith to god-ward
i spread abroad; so that we need not to speak ani thing.

1:9 for they themselv shew of us what manner of enter in we had
unto you, and how ye turn to god from idol to serv the live and
tru god; 1:10 and to wait for hi son from heaven, whom he raised
from the dead, even jesus, which deliv us from the wrath to come.

2:1 for yourselves, brethren, know our entranc in unto you, that it
wa not in vain: 2:2 but even after that we had suffer before, and
wer shame entreated, as ye know, at philippi, we were bold in
our god to speak unto you the gospel of god with much contention.

2:3 for our exhort wa not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in
guile: 2:4 but as we were allow of god to be put in trust with the
gospel, even so we speak; not as pleas men, but god, which trieth
our hearts.

2:5 for neither at ani time use we flatter words, as ye know, nor
a cloke of covetousness; god is witness: 2:6 nor of men sought we
glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been
burdensome, as the apostl of christ.

2:7 but we were gentl among you, even as a nurs cherisheth her
children: 2:8 So be affection desir of you, we were willing
to have impart unto you, not the gospel of god only, but also our
own souls, becaus ye were dear unto us.

2:9 for ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring
night and day, becaus we would not be chargeabl unto ani of you, we
preach unto you the gospel of god.

2:10 Ye are witnesses, and god also, how holili and justli and
unblam we behav ourselv among you that believe: 2:11 As ye
know how we exhort and comfort and charg everi one of you, as a
fath doth hi children, 2:12 that ye would walk worthi of god, who
hath call you unto hi kingdom and glory.

2:13 for thi caus also thank we god without ceasing, because, when
y receiv the word of god which ye heard of us, ye receiv it not
a the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of god, which
effectu worketh also in you that believe.

2:14 for ye, brethren, becam follow of the church of god which
in judaea are in christ jesus: for ye also have suffer like things
of your own countrymen, even as they have of the jews: 2:15 who both
kil the lord jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecut us;
and they pleas not god, and are contrari to all men: 2:16 forbidding
u to speak to the gentil that they might be saved, to fill up their
sin alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

2:17 but we, brethren, be taken from you for a short time in
presence, not in heart, endeavour the more abundantli to see your
fac with great desire.

2:18 wherefor we would have come unto you, even I paul, onc and
again; but satan hinder us.

2:19 for what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even
y in the presenc of our lord jesu christ at hi coming?  2:20 for
y are our glori and joy.

3:1 wherefor when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to
b left at athen alone; 3:2 and sent timotheus, our brother, and
minist of god, and our fellowlabour in the gospel of christ, to
establish you, and to comfort you concern your faith: 3:3 that no
man should be move by these afflictions: for yourselv know that we
ar appoint thereunto.

3:4 for verily, when we were with you, we told you befor that we
should suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know.

3:5 for thi cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know
your faith, lest by some mean the tempter have tempt you, and our
labour be in vain.

3:6 but now when timotheu came from you unto us, and brought us good
tid of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance
of us always, desir greatli to see us, as we also to see you: 3:7
therefore, brethren, we were comfort over you in all our affliction
and distress by your faith: 3:8 for now we live, if ye stand fast in
th lord.

3:9 for what thank can we render to god again for you, for all the
joy wherewith we joy for your sake befor our god; 3:10 night and day
pray exceedingli that we might see your face, and might perfect
that which is lack in your faith?  3:11 now god himself and our
father, and our lord jesu christ, direct our way unto you.

3:12 and the lord make you to increas and abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: 3:13 To the end
h may stablish your heart unblam in holi befor god, even
our father, at the come of our lord jesu christ with all his
saints.

4:1 furthermor then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the
lord jesus, that as ye have receiv of us how ye ought to walk and to
pleas god, so ye would abound more and more.

4:2 for ye know what command we gave you by the lord jesus.

4:3 for thi is the will of god, even your sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication: 4:4 that everi one of you should know
how to possess hi vessel in sanctif and honour; 4:5 not in the
lust of concupiscence, even as the gentil which know not god: 4:6
that no man go beyond and defraud hi brother in ani matter: because
that the lord is the aveng of all such, as we also have forewarned
y and testified.

4:7 for god hath not call us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

4:8 He therefor that despiseth, despiseth not man, but god, who hath
also given unto us hi holi spirit.

4:9 but as touch brotherli love ye need not that I write unto you:
for ye yourselv are taught of god to love one another.

4:10 and inde ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all
macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increas more and
more; 4:11 and that ye studi to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we command you; 4:12 that ye may
walk honestli toward them that are without, and that ye may have lack
of nothing.

4:13 but I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as other which have
no hope.

4:14 for if we believ that jesu die and rose again, even so them
also which sleep in jesu will god bring with him.

4:15 for thi we say unto you by the word of the lord, that we which
ar aliv and remain unto the come of the lord shall not prevent
them which are asleep.

4:16 for the lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
th voic of the archangel, and with the trump of god: and the dead in
christ shall rise first: 4:17 then we which are aliv and remain shall
b caught up togeth with them in the clouds, to meet the lord in the
air: and so shall we ever be with the lord.

4:18 wherefor comfort one anoth with these words.

5:1 but of the time and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that i
writ unto you.

5:2 for yourselv know perfectli that the day of the lord so cometh
a a thief in the night.

5:3 for when they shall say, peac and safety; then sudden destruction
cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall
not escape.

5:4 but ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should
overtak you as a thief.

5:5 Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we
ar not of the night, nor of darkness.

5:6 therefor let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be
sober.

5:7 for they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken
ar drunken in the night.

5:8 but let us, who are of the day, be sober, put on the
breastpl of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of
salvation.

5:9 for god hath not appoint us to wrath, but to obtain salvat by
our lord jesu christ, 5:10 who die for us, that, whether we wake or
sleep, we should live togeth with him.

5:11 wherefor comfort yourselv together, and edifi one another,
even as also ye do.

5:12 and we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among
you, and are over you in the lord, and admonish you; 5:13 and to
esteem them veri highli in love for their work' sake. and be at peace
among yourselves.

5:14 now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort
th feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.

5:15 see that none render evil for evil unto ani man; but ever follow
that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men.

5:16 rejoic evermore.

5:17 pray without ceasing.

5:18 In everi thing give thanks: for thi is the will of god in christ
jesu concern you.

5:19 quench not the spirit.

5:20 despis not prophesyings.

5:21 prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

5:22 abstain from all appear of evil.

5:23 and the veri god of peac sanctifi you wholly; and I pray god
your whole spirit and soul and bodi be preserv blameless unto the
com of our lord jesu christ.

5:24 faith is he that calleth you, who also will do it.

5:25 brethren, pray for us.

5:26 greet all the brethren with an holi kiss.

5:27 I charg you by the lord that thi epistl be read unto all the
holi brethren.

5:28 the grace of our lord jesu christ be with you. amen.




th second epistl of paul the apostl to the thessalonians


1:1 paul, and silvanus, and timotheus, unto the church of the
thessalonian in god our father and the lord jesu christ: 1:2 grace
unto you, and peace, from god our father and the lord jesu christ.

1:3 We are bound to thank god alway for you, brethren, as it is meet,
becaus that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the chariti of every
on of you all toward each other aboundeth; 1:4 So that we ourselves
glori in you in the church of god for your patienc and faith in all
your persecut and tribul that ye endure: 1:5 which is a
manifest token of the righteou judgment of god, that ye may be
count worthi of the kingdom of god, for which ye also suffer: 1:6
see it is a righteou thing with god to recompens tribul to
them that troubl you; 1:7 and to you who are troubl rest with us,
when the lord jesu shall be reveal from heaven with hi mighty
angels, 1:8 In flame fire take vengeanc on them that know not
god, and that obey not the gospel of our lord jesu christ: 1:9 who
shal be punish with everlast destruct from the presenc of
th lord, and from the glori of hi power; 1:10 when he shall come to
b glorifi in hi saints, and to be admir in all them that believe
(becaus our testimoni among you wa believed) in that day.

1:11 wherefor also we pray alway for you, that our god would count
you worthi of thi calling, and fulfil all the good pleasur of his
goodness, and the work of faith with power: 1:12 that the name of our
lord jesu christ may be glorifi in you, and ye in him, accord to
th grace of our god and the lord jesu christ.

2:1 now we beseech you, brethren, by the come of our lord jesus
christ, and by our gather togeth unto him, 2:2 that ye be not
soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter as from us, as that the day of christ is at hand.

2:3 let no man deceiv you by ani means: for that day shall not come,
except there come a fall away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition; 2:4 who opposeth and exalteth himself
abov all that is call god, or that is worshipped; so that he as god
sitteth in the templ of god, shew himself that he is god.

2:5 rememb ye not, that, when I wa yet with you, I told you these
things?  2:6 and now ye know what withholdeth that he might be
rev in hi time.

2:7 for the mysteri of iniqu doth alreadi work: onli he who now
letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way.

2:8 and then shall that wick be revealed, whom the lord shall
consum with the spirit of hi mouth, and shall destroy with the
bright of hi coming: 2:9 even him, whose come is after the
work of satan with all power and sign and lie wonders, 2:10 and
with all deceiv of unright in them that perish;
becaus they receiv not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved.

2:11 and for thi caus god shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believ a lie: 2:12 that they all might be damn who believed
not the truth, but had pleasur in unrighteousness.

2:13 but we are bound to give thank alway to god for you, brethren
belov of the lord, becaus god hath from the begin chosen you to
salv through sanctif of the spirit and belief of the
truth: 2:14 whereunto he call you by our gospel, to the obtain of
th glori of our lord jesu christ.

2:15 therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the tradit which ye
hav been taught, whether by word, or our epistle.

2:16 now our lord jesu christ himself, and god, even our father,
which hath love us, and hath given us everlast consol and
good hope through grace, 2:17 comfort your hearts, and stablish you in
everi good word and work.

3:1 finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the lord may have
fre course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: 3:2 and that we
may be deliv from unreason and wick men: for all men have
not faith.

3:3 but the lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you
from evil.

3:4 and we have confid in the lord touch you, that ye both do
and will do the thing which we command you.

3:5 and the lord direct your heart into the love of god, and into the
pati wait for christ.

3:6 now we command you, brethren, in the name of our lord jesus
christ, that ye withdraw yourselv from everi brother that walketh
disorderly, and not after the tradit which he receiv of us.

3:7 for yourselv know how ye ought to follow us: for we behav not
ourselv disorderli among you; 3:8 neither did we eat ani man' bread
for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeabl to ani of you: 3:9 not becaus we have not
power, but to make ourselv an ensampl unto you to follow us.

3:10 for even when we were with you, thi we command you, that if
ani would not work, neither should he eat.

3:11 for we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly,
work not at all, but are busybodies.

3:12 now them that are such we command and exhort by our lord jesus
christ, that with quiet they work, and eat their own bread.

3:13 but ye, brethren, be not weari in well doing.

3:14 and if ani man obey not our word by thi epistle, note that man,
and have no compani with him, that he may be ashamed.

3:15 yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

3:16 now the lord of peac himself give you peac alway by all means.
th lord be with you all.

3:17 the salut of paul with mine own hand, which is the token in
everi epistle: so I write.

3:18 the grace of our lord jesu christ be with you all. amen.




th first epistl of paul the apostl to timothy


1:1 paul, an apostl of jesu christ by the command of god our
saviour, and lord jesu christ, which is our hope; 1:2 unto timothy,
mi own son in the faith: grace, mercy, and peace, from god our father
and jesu christ our lord.

1:3 As I besought thee to abid still at ephesus, when I went into
macedonia, that thou mightest charg some that they teach no other
doctrine, 1:4 neither give heed to fabl and endless genealogies,
which minist questions, rather than godli edifi which is in
faith: so do.

1:5 now the end of the command is chariti out of a pure heart, and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: 1:6 from which some
hav swerv have turn asid unto vain jangling; 1:7 desir to
b teacher of the law; understand neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm.

1:8 but we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully; 1:9
know this, that the law is not made for a righteou man, but for
th lawless and disobedient, for the ungodli and for sinners, for
unholi and profane, for murder of father and murder of mothers,
for manslayers, 1:10 for whoremongers, for them that defil themselves
with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjur persons, and if
ther be ani other thing that is contrari to sound doctrine; 1:11
accord to the gloriou gospel of the bless god, which was
commit to my trust.

1:12 and I thank christ jesu our lord, who hath enabl me, for that
h count me faithful, put me into the ministry; 1:13 who was
befor a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained
mercy, becaus I did it ignorantli in unbelief.

1:14 and the grace of our lord wa exceed abund with faith and
lov which is in christ jesus.

1:15 thi is a faith saying, and worthi of all acceptation, that
christ jesu came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.

1:16 howbeit for thi caus I obtain mercy, that in me first jesus
christ might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which
should hereaft believ on him to life everlasting.

1:17 now unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the onli wise
god, be honour and glori for ever and ever. amen.

1:18 thi charg I commit unto thee, son timothy, accord to the
propheci which went befor on thee, that thou by them mightest war a
good warfare; 1:19 hold faith, and a good conscience; which some
hav put away concern faith have made shipwreck: 1:20 Of whom is
hymenaeu and alexander; whom I have deliv unto satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme.

2:1 I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and give of thanks, be made for all men; 2:2 for
kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peac life in all godli and honesty.

2:3 for thi is good and accept in the sight of god our saviour;
2:4 who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth.

2:5 for there is one god, and one mediat between god and men, the
man christ jesus; 2:6 who gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testifi in due time.

2:7 whereunto I am ordain a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the
truth in christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the gentil in faith and
verity.

2:8 I will therefor that men pray everi where, lift up holi hands,
without wrath and doubting.

2:9 In like manner also, that women adorn themselv in modest
apparel, with shamefaced and sobriety; not with broid hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costli array; 2:10 but (which becometh women
profess godliness) with good works.

2:11 let the woman learn in silenc with all subjection.

2:12 but I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp author over
th man, but to be in silence.

2:13 for adam wa first formed, then eve.

2:14 and adam wa not deceived, but the woman be deceiv wa in
th transgression.

2:15 notwithstand she shall be save in childbearing, if they
continu in faith and chariti and holi with sobriety.

3:1 thi is a true saying, If a man desir the offic of a bishop, he
desireth a good work.

3:2 A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to
teach; 3:3 not given to wine, no striker, not greedi of filthi lucre;
but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; 3:4 one that ruleth well his
own house, have hi children in subject with all gravity; 3:5
(for if a man know not how to rule hi own house, how shall he take
car of the church of god?)  3:6 not a novice, lest be lift up
with pride he fall into the condemn of the devil.

3:7 moreov he must have a good report of them which are without;
lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.

3:8 likewis must the deacon be grave, not doubletongued, not given
to much wine, not greedi of filthi lucre; 3:9 hold the mysteri of
th faith in a pure conscience.

3:10 and let these also first be proved; then let them use the office
of a deacon, be found blameless.

3:11 even so must their wive be grave, not slanderers, sober,
faith in all things.

3:12 let the deacon be the husband of one wife, rule their
children and their own hous well.

3:13 for they that have use the offic of a deacon well purchas to
themselv a good degree, and great bold in the faith which is in
christ jesus.

3:14 these thing write I unto thee, hope to come unto thee shortly:
3:15 but if I tarri long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to
behav thyself in the hous of god, which is the church of the living
god, the pillar and ground of the truth.

3:16 and without controversi great is the mysteri of godliness: god
wa manifest in the flesh, justifi in the spirit, seen of angels,
preach unto the gentiles, believ on in the world, receiv up into
glory.

4:1 now the spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter time some
shal depart from the faith, give heed to seduc spirits, and
doctrin of devils; 4:2 speak lie in hypocrisy; have their
consci sear with a hot iron; 4:3 forbid to marry, and
command to abstain from meats, which god hath creat to be
receiv with thanksgiv of them which believ and know the truth.

4:4 for everi creatur of god is good, and noth to be refused, if
it be receiv with thanksgiving: 4:5 for it is sanctifi by the word
of god and prayer.

4:6 If thou put the brethren in remembr of these things, thou
shalt be a good minist of jesu christ, nourish up in the word of
faith and of good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained.

4:7 but refus profan and old wives' fables, and exercis thyself
rath unto godliness.

4:8 for bodili exercis profiteth little: but godli is profitable
unto all things, have promis of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

4:9 thi is a faith say and worthi of all acceptation.

4:10 for therefor we both labour and suffer reproach, becaus we
trust in the live god, who is the saviour of all men, special of
thos that believe.

4:11 these thing command and teach.

4:12 let no man despis thi youth; but be thou an exampl of the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith,
in purity.

4:13 till I come, give attend to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine.

4:14 neglect not the gift that is in thee, which wa given thee by
prophecy, with the lay on of the hand of the presbytery.

4:15 medit upon these things; give thyself wholli to them; that thy
profit may appear to all.

4:16 take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continu in them:
for in do thi thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear
thee.

5:1 rebuk not an elder, but intreat him as a father; and the younger
men as brethren; 5:2 the elder women as mothers; the younger as
sisters, with all purity.

5:3 honour widow that are widow indeed.

5:4 but if ani widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to
shew pieti at home, and to requit their parents: for that is good and
accept befor god.

5:5 now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in god, and
continueth in supplic and prayer night and day.

5:6 but she that liveth in pleasur is dead while she liveth.

5:7 and these thing give in charge, that they may be blameless.

5:8 but if ani provid not for hi own, and special for those of his
own house, he hath deni the faith, and is wors than an infidel.

5:9 let not a widow be taken into the number under threescor years
old, have been the wife of one man.

5:10 well report of for good works; if she have brought up children,
if she have lodg strangers, if she have wash the saints' feet, if
sh have reliev the afflicted, if she have dilig follow every
good work.

5:11 but the younger widow refuse: for when they have begun to wax
wanton against christ, they will marry; 5:12 have damnation, because
they have cast off their first faith.

5:13 and withal they learn to be idle, wander about from hous to
house; and not onli idle, but tattler also and busybodies, speaking
th which they ought not.

5:14 I will therefor that the younger women marry, bear children,
guid the house, give none occas to the adversari to speak
reproachfully.

5:15 for some are alreadi turn asid after satan.

5:16 If ani man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve
them, and let not the church be charged; that it may reliev them that
ar widow indeed.

5:17 let the elder that rule well be count worthi of doubl honour,
especi they who labour in the word and doctrine.

5:18 for the scriptur saith, thou shalt not muzzl the ox that
treadeth out the corn. and, the labour is worthi of hi reward.

5:19 against an elder receiv not an accusation, but befor two or
thre witnesses.

5:20 them that sin rebuk befor all, that other also may fear.

5:21 I charg thee befor god, and the lord jesu christ, and the
elect angels, that thou observ these thing without prefer one
befor another, do noth by partiality.

5:22 lay hand suddenli on no man, neither be partak of other men's
sins: keep thyself pure.

5:23 drink no longer water, but use a littl wine for thi stomach's
sak and thine often infirmities.

5:24 some men' sin are open beforehand, go befor to judgment;
and some men they follow after.

5:25 likewis also the good work of some are manifest beforehand; and
they that are otherwis cannot be hid.

6:1 let as mani servant as are under the yoke count their own masters
worthi of all honour, that the name of god and hi doctrin be not
blasphemed.

6:2 and they that have believ masters, let them not despis them,
becaus they are brethren; but rather do them service, becaus they
ar faith and beloved, partak of the benefit. these thing teach
and exhort.

6:3 If ani man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesom words,
even the word of our lord jesu christ, and to the doctrin which is
accord to godliness; 6:4 He is proud, know nothing, but doting
about question and strife of words, whereof cometh envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, 6:5 pervers disput of men of corrupt
minds, and destitut of the truth, suppos that gain is godliness:
from such withdraw thyself.

6:6 but godli with content is great gain.

6:7 for we brought noth into thi world, and it is certain we can
carri noth out.

6:8 and have food and raiment let us be therewith content.

6:9 but they that will be rich fall into temptat and a snare, and
into mani foolish and hurt lusts, which drown men in destruction
and perdition.

6:10 for the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some
covet after, they have er from the faith, and pierc themselves
through with mani sorrows.

6:11 but thou, O man of god, flee these things; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.

6:12 fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on etern life,
whereunto thou art also called, and hast profess a good profession
befor mani witnesses.

6:13 I give thee charg in the sight of god, who quickeneth all
things, and befor christ jesus, who befor pontiu pilat wit a
good confession; 6:14 that thou keep thi command without spot,
unrebukable, until the appear of our lord jesu christ: 6:15 which
in hi time he shall shew, who is the bless and onli potentate, the
k of kings, and lord of lords; 6:16 who onli hath immortality,
dwel in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath
seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. amen.

6:17 charg them that are rich in thi world, that they be not
highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the live god, who
giveth us richli all thing to enjoy; 6:18 that they do good, that
they be rich in good works, readi to distribute, will to
communicate; 6:19 lay up in store for themselv a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on etern life.

6:20 O timothy, keep that which is commit to thi trust, avoiding
profan and vain babblings, and opposit of scienc fals so
called: 6:21 which some profess have er concern the faith.
grac be with thee. amen.




th second epistl of paul the apostl to timothy


1:1 paul, an apostl of jesu christ by the will of god, accord to
th promis of life which is in christ jesus, 1:2 To timothy,
mi dearli belov son: grace, mercy, and peace, from god the father
and christ jesu our lord.

1:3 I thank god, whom I serv from my forefath with pure
conscience, that without ceas I have remembr of thee in my
pray night and day; 1:4 greatli desir to see thee, be mindful
of thi tears, that I may be fill with joy; 1:5 when I call to
remembr the unfeign faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in
thi grandmoth lois, and thi mother eunice; and I am persuad that
in thee also.

1:6 wherefor I put thee in remembr that thou stir up the gift of
god, which is in thee by the put on of my hands.

1:7 for god hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind.

1:8 Be not thou therefor asham of the testimoni of our lord, nor of
m hi prisoner: but be thou partak of the afflict of the gospel
accord to the power of god; 1:9 who hath save us, and call us
with an holi calling, not accord to our works, but accord to his
own purpos and grace, which wa given us in christ jesu befor the
world began, 1:10 but is now made manifest by the appear of our
saviour jesu christ, who hath abolish death, and hath brought life
and immort to light through the gospel: 1:11 whereunto I am
appoint a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the gentiles.

1:12 for the which caus I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am
not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuad that he
i abl to keep that which I have commit unto him against that day.

1:13 hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me,
in faith and love which is in christ jesus.

1:14 that good thing which wa commit unto thee keep by the holy
ghost which dwelleth in us.

1:15 thi thou knowest, that all they which are in asia be turn away
from me; of whom are phygellu and hermogenes.

1:16 the lord give merci unto the hous of onesiphorus; for he oft
refresh me, and wa not asham of my chain: 1:17 but, when he was
in rome, he sought me out veri diligently, and found me.

1:18 the lord grant unto him that he may find merci of the lord in
that day: and in how mani thing he minist unto me at ephesus,
th knowest veri well.

2:1 thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in christ
jesus.

2:2 and the thing that thou hast heard of me among mani witnesses,
th same commit thou to faith men, who shall be abl to teach
oth also.

2:3 thou therefor endur hardness, as a good soldier of jesu christ.

2:4 No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affair of this
life; that he may pleas him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.

2:5 and if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully.

2:6 the husbandman that laboureth must be first partak of the
fruits.

2:7 consid what I say; and the lord give thee understand in all
things.

2:8 rememb that jesu christ of the seed of david wa rais from
th dead accord to my gospel: 2:9 wherein I suffer trouble, as an
evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of god is not bound.

2:10 therefor I endur all thing for the elect' sakes, that they
may also obtain the salvat which is in christ jesu with eternal
glory.

2:11 It is a faith saying: for if we be dead with him, we shall
also live with him: 2:12 If we suffer, we shall also reign with him:
if we deni him, he also will deni us: 2:13 If we believ not, yet he
abideth faithful: he cannot deni himself.

2:14 Of these thing put them in remembrance, charg them befor the
lord that they strive not about word to no profit, but to the
subvert of the hearers.

2:15 studi to shew thyself approv unto god, a workman that needeth
not to be ashamed, rightli divid the word of truth.

2:16 but shun profan and vain babblings: for they will increas unto
mor ungodliness.

2:17 and their word will eat as doth a canker: of whom is hymenaeus
and philetus; 2:18 who concern the truth have erred, say that
th resurrect is past already; and overthrow the faith of some.

2:19 nevertheless the foundat of god standeth sure, have this
seal, the lord knoweth them that are his. and, let everi one that
nameth the name of christ depart from iniquity.

2:20 but in a great hous there are not onli vessel of gold and of
silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to
dishonour.

2:21 If a man therefor purg himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master' use, and prepared
unto everi good work.

2:22 flee also youth lusts: but follow righteousness, faith,
charity, peace, with them that call on the lord out of a pure heart.

2:23 but foolish and unlearn question avoid, know that they do
gend strifes.

2:24 and the servant of the lord must not strive; but be gentl unto
al men, apt to teach, patient, 2:25 In meek instruct those
that oppos themselves; if god peradventur will give them repentance
to the acknowledg of the truth; 2:26 and that they may recover
themselv out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captiv by him
at hi will.

3:1 thi know also, that in the last day peril time shall come.

3:2 for men shall be lover of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedi to parents, unthankful, unholy, 3:3
without natur affection, trucebreakers, fals accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despis of those that are good, 3:4 traitors, heady,
highminded, lover of pleasur more than lover of god; 3:5 have a
form of godliness, but deni the power thereof: from such turn away.

3:6 for of thi sort are they which creep into houses, and lead
capt silli women laden with sins, led away with diver lusts, 3:7
ever learning, and never abl to come to the knowledg of the truth.

3:8 now as jann and jambr withstood moses, so do these also resist
th truth: men of corrupt minds, reprob concern the faith.

3:9 but they shall proceed no further: for their folli shall be
manifest unto all men, as their' also was.

3:10 but thou hast fulli known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose,
faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, 3:11 persecutions,
afflictions, which came unto me at antioch, at iconium, at lystra;
what persecut I endured: but out of them all the lord delivered
me.

3:12 yea, and all that will live godli in christ jesu shall suffer
persecution.

3:13 but evil men and seduc shall wax wors and worse, deceiving,
and be deceived.

3:14 but continu thou in the thing which thou hast learn and hast
been assur of, know of whom thou hast learn them; 3:15 and that
from a child thou hast known the holi scriptures, which are abl to
mak thee wise unto salvat through faith which is in christ jesus.

3:16 all scriptur is given by inspir of god, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruct in
righteousness: 3:17 that the man of god may be perfect, throughly
furnish unto all good works.

4:1 I charg thee therefor befor god, and the lord jesu christ, who
shal judg the quick and the dead at hi appear and hi kingdom;
4:2 preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all longsuff and doctrine.

4:3 for the time will come when they will not endur sound doctrine;
but after their own lust shall they heap to themselv teachers,
hav itch ears; 4:4 and they shall turn away their ear from the
truth, and shall be turn unto fables.

4:5 but watch thou in all things, endur afflictions, do the work of
an evangelist, make full proof of thi ministry.

4:6 for I am now readi to be offered, and the time of my departur is
at hand.

4:7 I have fought a good fight, I have finish my course, I have kept
th faith: 4:8 henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the lord, the righteou judge, shall give me at
that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing.

4:9 Do thi dilig to come shortli unto me: 4:10 for dema hath
forsaken me, have love thi present world, and is depart unto
thessalonica; crescen to galatia, titu unto dalmatia.

4:11 onli luke is with me. take mark, and bring him with thee: for he
i profit to me for the ministry.

4:12 and tychicu have I sent to ephesus.

4:13 the cloke that I left at troa with carpus, when thou comest,
br with thee, and the books, but especi the parchments.

4:14 alexand the coppersmith did me much evil: the lord reward him
accord to hi works: 4:15 Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath
greatli withstood our words.

4:16 At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me:
i pray god that it may not be laid to their charge.

4:17 notwithstand the lord stood with me, and strengthen me; that
bi me the preach might be fulli known, and that all the gentiles
might hear: and I wa deliv out of the mouth of the lion.

4:18 and the lord shall deliv me from everi evil work, and will
preserv me unto hi heavenli kingdom: to whom be glori for ever and
ever. amen.

4:19 salut prisca and aquila, and the household of onesiphorus.

4:20 erastu abod at corinth: but trophimu have I left at miletum
sick.

4:21 Do thi dilig to come befor winter. eubulu greeteth thee,
and pudens, and linus, and claudia, and all the brethren.

4:22 the lord jesu christ be with thi spirit. grace be with you.
amen.




th epistl of paul the apostl to titus


1:1 paul, a servant of god, and an apostl of jesu christ, according
to the faith of god' elect, and the acknowledg of the truth which
i after godliness; 1:2 In hope of etern life, which god, that
cannot lie, promis befor the world began; 1:3 but hath in due times
manifest hi word through preaching, which is commit unto me
accord to the command of god our saviour; 1:4 To titus, mine
own son after the common faith: grace, mercy, and peace, from god the
fath and the lord jesu christ our saviour.

1:5 for thi caus left I thee in crete, that thou shouldest set in
ord the thing that are wanting, and ordain elder in everi city, as
i had appoint thee: 1:6 If ani be blameless, the husband of one
wife, have faith children not accus of riot or unruly.

1:7 for a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of god; not
selfwilled, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given
to filthi lucre; 1:8 but a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men,
sober, just, holy, temperate; 1:9 hold fast the faith word as he
hath been taught, that he may be abl by sound doctrin both to exhort
and to convinc the gainsayers.

1:10 for there are mani unruli and vain talker and deceivers,
speci they of the circumcision: 1:11 whose mouth must be stopped,
who subvert whole houses, teach thing which they ought not, for
filthi lucre' sake.

1:12 one of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, the
cretian are alway liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.

1:13 thi wit is true. wherefor rebuk them sharply, that they
may be sound in the faith; 1:14 not give heed to jewish fables, and
command of men, that turn from the truth.

1:15 unto the pure all thing are pure: but unto them that are defiled
and unbeliev is noth pure; but even their mind and conscienc is
defiled.

1:16 they profess that they know god; but in work they deni him,
b abominable, and disobedient, and unto everi good work reprobate.

2:1 but speak thou the thing which becom sound doctrine: 2:2 that
th age men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity,
in patience.

2:3 the age women likewise, that they be in behaviour as becometh
holiness, not fals accusers, not given to much wine, teacher of good
things; 2:4 that they may teach the young women to be sober, to love
their husbands, to love their children, 2:5 To be discreet, chaste,
keep at home, good, obedi to their own husbands, that the word
of god be not blasphemed.

2:6 young men likewis exhort to be sober minded.

2:7 In all thing shew thyself a pattern of good works: in doctrine
shew uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, 2:8 sound speech, that
cannot be condemned; that he that is of the contrari part may be
ashamed, have no evil thing to say of you.

2:9 exhort servant to be obedi unto their own masters, and to
pleas them well in all things; not answer again; 2:10 not
purloining, but shew all good fidelity; that they may adorn the
doctrin of god our saviour in all things.

2:11 for the grace of god that bringeth salvat hath appear to all
men, 2:12 teach us that, deni ungodli and worldli lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in thi present world;
2:13 look for that bless hope, and the gloriou appear of the
great god and our saviour jesu christ; 2:14 who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifi unto himself a
peculiar people, zealou of good works.

2:15 these thing speak, and exhort, and rebuk with all authority.
let no man despis thee.

3:1 put them in mind to be subject to princip and powers, to
obey magistrates, to be readi to everi good work, 3:2 To speak evil of
no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shew all meek unto all
men.

3:3 for we ourselv also were sometim foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serv diver lust and pleasures, live in malic and
envy, hateful, and hate one another.

3:4 but after that the kind and love of god our saviour toward man
appeared, 3:5 not by work of righteous which we have done, but
accord to hi merci he save us, by the wash of regeneration,
and renew of the holi ghost; 3:6 which he shed on us abundantly
through jesu christ our saviour; 3:7 that be justifi by his
grace, we should be made heir accord to the hope of etern life.

3:8 thi is a faith saying, and these thing I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believ in god might be
car to maintain good works. these thing are good and profitable
unto men.

3:9 but avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and
striv about the law; for they are unprofit and vain.

3:10 A man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition
reject; 3:11 know that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth,
b condemn of himself.

3:12 when I shall send artema unto thee, or tychicus, be dilig to
com unto me to nicopolis: for I have determin there to winter.

3:13 bring zena the lawyer and apollo on their journey diligently,
that noth be want unto them.

3:14 and let our' also learn to maintain good work for necessary
uses, that they be not unfruitful.

3:15 all that are with me salut thee. greet them that love us in the
faith. grace be with you all. amen.




th epistl of paul the apostl to philemon


1:1 paul, a prison of jesu christ, and timothi our brother, unto
philemon our dearli beloved, and fellowlabourer, 1:2 and to our
belov apphia, and archippu our fellowsoldier, and to the church in
thi house: 1:3 grace to you, and peace, from god our father and the
lord jesu christ.

1:4 I thank my god, make mention of thee alway in my prayers, 1:5
hear of thi love and faith, which thou hast toward the lord jesus,
and toward all saints; 1:6 that the commun of thi faith may
becom effectu by the acknowledg of everi good thing which is in
you in christ jesus.

1:7 for we have great joy and consol in thi love, becaus the
bowel of the saint are refresh by thee, brother.

1:8 wherefore, though I might be much bold in christ to enjoin thee
that which is convenient, 1:9 yet for love' sake I rather beseech
thee, be such an one as paul the aged, and now also a prison of
jesu christ.

1:10 I beseech thee for my son onesimus, whom I have begotten in my
bonds: 1:11 which in time past wa to thee unprofitable, but now
profit to thee and to me: 1:12 whom I have sent again: thou
therefor receiv him, that is, mine own bowels: 1:13 whom I would
hav retain with me, that in thi stead he might have minist unto
m in the bond of the gospel: 1:14 but without thi mind would I do
nothing; that thi benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but
willingly.

1:15 for perhap he therefor depart for a season, that thou
shouldest receiv him for ever; 1:16 not now as a servant, but abov a
servant, a brother beloved, special to me, but how much more unto
thee, both in the flesh, and in the lord?  1:17 If thou count me
therefor a partner, receiv him as myself.

1:18 If he hath wrong thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine
account; 1:19 I paul have written it with mine own hand, I will repay
it: albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own
self besides.

1:20 yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the lord: refresh my
bowel in the lord.

1:21 have confid in thi obedi I wrote unto thee, knowing
that thou wilt also do more than I say.

1:22 but withal prepar me also a lodging: for I trust that through
your prayer I shall be given unto you.

1:23 there salut thee epaphras, my fellowprison in christ jesus;
1:24 marcus, aristarchus, demas, lucas, my fellowlabourers.

1:25 the grace of our lord jesu christ be with your spirit. amen.




th epistl of paul the apostl to the hebrews


1:1 god, who at sundri time and in diver manner spake in time past
unto the father by the prophets, 1:2 hath in these last day spoken
unto us by hi son, whom he hath appoint heir of all things, by whom
also he made the worlds; 1:3 who be the bright of hi glory,
and the express imag of hi person, and uphold all thing by the
word of hi power, when he had by himself purg our sins, sat down on
th right hand of the majesti on high: 1:4 be made so much better
than the angels, as he hath by inherit obtain a more excellent
nam than they.

1:5 for unto which of the angel said he at ani time, thou art my son,
thi day have I begotten thee? and again, I will be to him a father,
and he shall be to me a son?  1:6 and again, when he bringeth in the
firstbegotten into the world, he saith, and let all the angel of god
worship him.

1:7 and of the angel he saith, who maketh hi angel spirits, and his
minist a flame of fire.

1:8 but unto the son he saith, thi throne, O god, is for ever and
ever: a sceptr of righteous is the sceptr of thi kingdom.

1:9 thou hast love righteousness, and hate iniquity; therefor god,
even thi god, hath anoint thee with the oil of glad abov thy
fellows.

1:10 and, thou, lord, in the begin hast laid the foundat of the
earth; and the heaven are the work of thine hands: 1:11 they shall
perish; but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a
garment; 1:12 and as a vestur shalt thou fold them up, and they shall
b changed: but thou art the same, and thi year shall not fail.

1:13 but to which of the angel said he at ani time, sit on my right
hand, until I make thine enemi thi footstool?  1:14 are they not all
minist spirits, sent forth to minist for them who shall be
heir of salvation?  2:1 therefor we ought to give the more earnest
he to the thing which we have heard, lest at ani time we should let
them slip.

2:2 for if the word spoken by angel wa stedfast, and every
transgress and disobedi receiv a just recomp of reward;
2:3 how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at
th first began to be spoken by the lord, and wa confirm unto us by
them that heard him; 2:4 god also bear them witness, both with
sign and wonders, and with diver miracles, and gift of the holy
ghost, accord to hi own will?  2:5 for unto the angel hath he not
put in subject the world to come, whereof we speak.

2:6 but one in a certain place testified, saying, what is man, that
thou art mind of him? or the son of man that thou visitest him?
2:7 thou madest him a littl lower than the angels; thou crownedst him
with glori and honour, and didst set him over the work of thi hands:
2:8 thou hast put all thing in subject under hi feet. for in that
h put all in subject under him, he left noth that is not put
und him.

but now we see not yet all thing put under him.

2:9 but we see jesus, who wa made a littl lower than the angel for
th suffer of death, crown with glori and honour; that he by the
grac of god should tast death for everi man.

2:10 for it becam him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bring mani son unto glory, to make the captain of their
salv perfect through sufferings.

2:11 for both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctifi are all
of one: for which caus he is not asham to call them brethren, 2:12
saying, I will declar thi name unto my brethren, in the midst of the
church will I sing prais unto thee.

2:13 and again, I will put my trust in him. and again, behold I and
th children which god hath given me.

2:14 forasmuch then as the children are partak of flesh and blood,
h also himself likewis took part of the same; that through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil;
2:15 and deliv them who through fear of death were all their
lifetim subject to bondage.

2:16 for verili he took not on him the natur of angels; but he took
on him the seed of abraham.

2:17 wherefor in all thing it behov him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merci and faith high priest in
th pertain to god, to make reconcili for the sin of the
people.

2:18 for in that he himself hath suffer be tempted, he is abl to
succour them that are tempted.

3:1 wherefore, holi brethren, partak of the heavenli calling,
consid the apostl and high priest of our profession, christ jesus;
3:2 who wa faith to him that appoint him, as also mose was
faith in all hi house.

3:3 for thi man wa count worthi of more glori than moses, inasmuch
a he who hath build the hous hath more honour than the house.

3:4 for everi hous is build by some man; but he that built all
th is god.

3:5 and mose verili wa faith in all hi house, as a servant, for
a testimoni of those thing which were to be spoken after; 3:6 but
christ as a son over hi own house; whose hous are we, if we hold
fast the confid and the rejoic of the hope firm unto the end.

3:7 wherefor (a the holi ghost saith, To day if ye will hear his
voice, 3:8 harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day
of temptat in the wilderness: 3:9 when your father tempt me,
prov me, and saw my work forti years.

3:10 wherefor I wa griev with that generation, and said, they do
alway err in their heart; and they have not known my ways.

3:11 So I sware in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest.)  3:12
take heed, brethren, lest there be in ani of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in depart from the live god.

3:13 but exhort one anoth daily, while it is call To day; lest any
of you be harden through the deceit of sin.

3:14 for we are made partak of christ, if we hold the begin of
our confid stedfast unto the end; 3:15 while it is said, To day if
y will hear hi voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.

3:16 for some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that
cam out of egypt by moses.

3:17 but with whom wa he griev forti years? wa it not with them
that had sinned, whose carcas fell in the wilderness?  3:18 and to
whom sware he that they should not enter into hi rest, but to them
that believ not?  3:19 So we see that they could not enter in
becaus of unbelief.

4:1 let us therefor fear, lest, a promis be left us of entering
into hi rest, ani of you should seem to come short of it.

4:2 for unto us wa the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the
word preach did not profit them, not be mix with faith in them
that heard it.

4:3 for we which have believ do enter into rest, as he said, As i
hav sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the
work were finish from the foundat of the world.

4:4 for he spake in a certain place of the seventh day on thi wise,
and god did rest the seventh day from all hi works.

4:5 and in thi place again, If they shall enter into my rest.

4:6 see therefor it remaineth that some must enter therein, and
they to whom it wa first preach enter not in becaus of unbelief:
4:7 again, he limiteth a certain day, say in david, To day, after
so long a time; as it is said, To day if ye will hear hi voice,
harden not your hearts.

4:8 for if jesu had given them rest, then would he not afterward have
spoken of anoth day.

4:9 there remaineth therefor a rest to the peopl of god.

4:10 for he that is enter into hi rest, he also hath ceas from
hi own works, as god did from his.

4:11 let us labour therefor to enter into that rest, lest ani man
fal after the same exampl of unbelief.

4:12 for the word of god is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any
twoedg sword, pierc even to the divid asund of soul and
spirit, and of the joint and marrow, and is a discern of the
thought and intent of the heart.

4:13 neither is there ani creatur that is not manifest in hi sight:
but all thing are nake and open unto the eye of him with whom we
hav to do.

4:14 see then that we have a great high priest, that is pass into
th heavens, jesu the son of god, let us hold fast our profession.

4:15 for we have not an high priest which cannot be touch with the
feel of our infirmities; but wa in all point tempt like as we
are, yet without sin.

4:16 let us therefor come boldli unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

5:1 for everi high priest taken from among men is ordain for men in
th pertain to god, that he may offer both gift and sacrifices
for sins: 5:2 who can have compass on the ignorant, and on them
that are out of the way; for that he himself also is compass with
infirmity.

5:3 and by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for
himself, to offer for sins.

5:4 and no man taketh thi honour unto himself, but he that is called
of god, as wa aaron.

5:5 So also christ glorifi not himself to be made an high priest;
but he that said unto him, thou art my son, to day have I begotten
thee.

5:6 As he saith also in anoth place, thou art a priest for ever
aft the order of melchisedec.

5:7 who in the day of hi flesh, when he had offer up prayer and
suppl with strong cri and tear unto him that wa abl to
sav him from death, and wa heard in that he feared; 5:8 though he
wer a son, yet learn he obedi by the thing which he suffered;
5:9 and be made perfect, he becam the author of etern salvation
unto all them that obey him; 5:10 call of god an high priest after
th order of melchisedec.

5:11 Of whom we have mani thing to say, and hard to be uttered,
se ye are dull of hearing.

5:12 for when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that
on teach you again which be the first principl of the oracl of
god; and are becom such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

5:13 for everi one that useth milk is unskil in the word of
righteousness: for he is a babe.

5:14 but strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even
thos who by reason of use have their sens exercis to discern both
good and evil.

6:1 therefor leav the principl of the doctrin of christ, let us
go on unto perfection; not lay again the foundat of repentance
from dead works, and of faith toward god, 6:2 Of the doctrin of
baptisms, and of lay on of hands, and of resurrect of the dead,
and of etern judgment.

6:3 and thi will we do, if god permit.

6:4 for it is imposs for those who were onc enlightened, and have
tast of the heavenli gift, and were made partak of the holy
ghost, 6:5 and have tast the good word of god, and the power of the
world to come, 6:6 If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance; see they crucifi to themselv the son of god afresh,
and put him to an open shame.

6:7 for the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it,
and bringeth forth herb meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receiveth bless from god: 6:8 but that which beareth thorn and
brier is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be
burned.

6:9 but, beloved, we are persuad better thing of you, and things
that accompani salvation, though we thu speak.

6:10 for god is not unright to forget your work and labour of
love, which ye have shew toward hi name, in that ye have ministered
to the saints, and do minister.

6:11 and we desir that everi one of you do shew the same dilig to
th full assur of hope unto the end: 6:12 that ye be not slothful,
but follow of them who through faith and patienc inherit the
promises.

6:13 for when god made promis to abraham, becaus he could swear by
no greater, he sware by himself, 6:14 saying, sure bless I will
bless thee, and multipli I will multipli thee.

6:15 and so, after he had patient endured, he obtain the promise.

6:16 for men verili swear by the greater: and an oath for confirmation
i to them an end of all strife.

6:17 wherein god, will more abundantli to shew unto the heir of
promis the immut of hi counsel, confirm it by an oath: 6:18
that by two immut things, in which it wa imposs for god to
lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refug to
lay hold upon the hope set befor us: 6:19 which hope we have as an
anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into
that within the veil; 6:20 whither the forerunn is for us entered,
even jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of
melchisedec.

7:1 for thi melchisedec, king of salem, priest of the most high god,
who met abraham return from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed
him; 7:2 To whom also abraham gave a tenth part of all; first be by
interpret king of righteousness, and after that also king of
salem, which is, king of peace; 7:3 without father, without mother,
without descent, have neither begin of days, nor end of life;
but made like unto the son of god; abideth a priest continually.

7:4 now consid how great thi man was, unto whom even the patriarch
abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.

7:5 and verili they that are of the son of levi, who receiv the
offic of the priesthood, have a command to take tith of the
peopl accord to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they
com out of the loin of abraham: 7:6 but he whose descent is not
count from them receiv tith of abraham, and bless him that had
th promises.

7:7 and without all contradict the less is bless of the better.

7:8 and here men that die receiv tithes; but there he receiveth them,
of whom it is wit that he liveth.

7:9 and as I may so say, levi also, who receiveth tithes, pay tithes
in abraham.

7:10 for he wa yet in the loin of hi father, when melchisedec met
him.

7:11 If therefor perfect were by the levit priesthood, (for
und it the peopl receiv the law,) what further need wa there
that anoth priest should rise after the order of melchisedec, and
not be call after the order of aaron?  7:12 for the priesthood being
changed, there is made of necess a chang also of the law.

7:13 for he of whom these thing are spoken pertaineth to another
tribe, of which no man gave attend at the altar.

7:14 for it is evid that our lord sprang out of juda; of which
trib mose spake noth concern priesthood.

7:15 and it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitud of
melchisedec there ariseth anoth priest, 7:16 who is made, not after
th law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless
life.

7:17 for he testifieth, thou art a priest for ever after the order of
melchisedec.

7:18 for there is verili a disannul of the command going
befor for the weak and unprofit thereof.

7:19 for the law made noth perfect, but the bring in of a better
hop did; by the which we draw nigh unto god.

7:20 and inasmuch as not without an oath he wa made priest: 7:21 (for
thos priest were made without an oath; but thi with an oath by him
that said unto him, the lord sware and will not repent, thou art a
priest for ever after the order of melchisedec:) 7:22 By so much was
jesu made a sureti of a better testament.

7:23 and they truli were mani priests, becaus they were not suffered
to continu by reason of death: 7:24 but thi man, becaus he
continueth ever, hath an unchang priesthood.

7:25 wherefor he is abl also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto god by him, see he ever liveth to make intercess for them.

7:26 for such an high priest becam us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separ from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;
7:27 who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up
sacrifice, first for hi own sins, and then for the people's: for this
h did once, when he offer up himself.

7:28 for the law maketh men high priest which have infirmity; but the
word of the oath, which wa sinc the law, maketh the son, who is
consecr for evermore.

8:1 now of the thing which we have spoken thi is the sum: We have
such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the
majesti in the heavens; 8:2 A minist of the sanctuary, and of the
tru tabernacle, which the lord pitched, and not man.

8:3 for everi high priest is ordain to offer gift and sacrifices:
wherefor it is of necess that thi man have somewhat also to
offer.

8:4 for if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, see that
ther are priest that offer gift accord to the law: 8:5 who serve
unto the exampl and shadow of heavenli things, as mose was
admonish of god when he wa about to make the tabernacle: for, see,
saith he, that thou make all thing accord to the pattern shew to
the in the mount.

8:6 but now hath he obtain a more excel ministry, by how much
also he is the mediat of a better covenant, which wa established
upon better promises.

8:7 for if that first coven had been faultless, then should no
plac have been sought for the second.

8:8 for find fault with them, he saith, behold, the day come,
saith the lord, when I will make a new coven with the hous of
israel and with the hous of judah: 8:9 not accord to the covenant
that I made with their father in the day when I took them by the hand
to lead them out of the land of egypt; becaus they continu not in
mi covenant, and I regard them not, saith the lord.

8:10 for thi is the coven that I will make with the hous of
israel after those days, saith the lord; I will put my law into their
mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a god, and
they shall be to me a people: 8:11 and they shall not teach everi man
hi neighbour, and everi man hi brother, saying, know the lord: for
al shall know me, from the least to the greatest.

8:12 for I will be merci to their unrighteousness, and their sins
and their iniqu will I rememb no more.

8:13 In that he saith, A new covenant, he hath made the first old. now
that which decayeth and waxeth old is readi to vanish away.

9:1 then verili the first coven had also ordin of divine
service, and a worldli sanctuary.

9:2 for there wa a tabernacl made; the first, wherein wa the
candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is call the
sanctuary.

9:3 and after the second veil, the tabernacl which is call the
holiest of all; 9:4 which had the golden censer, and the ark of the
coven overlaid round about with gold, wherein wa the golden pot
that had manna, and aaron' rod that budded, and the tabl of the
covenant; 9:5 and over it the cherubim of glori shadow the
mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.

9:6 now when these thing were thu ordained, the priest went always
into the first tabernacle, accomplish the servic of god.

9:7 but into the second went the high priest alon onc everi year,
not without blood, which he offer for himself, and for the error of
th people: 9:8 the holi ghost thi signifying, that the way into the
holiest of all wa not yet made manifest, while as the first
tabernacl wa yet standing: 9:9 which wa a figur for the time then
present, in which were offer both gift and sacrifices, that could
not make him that did the servic perfect, as pertain to the
conscience; 9:10 which stood onli in meat and drinks, and divers
washings, and carnal ordinances, impos on them until the time of
reformation.

9:11 but christ be come an high priest of good thing to come, by a
great and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to
say, not of thi building; 9:12 neither by the blood of goat and
calves, but by hi own blood he enter in onc into the holi place,
hav obtain etern redempt for us.

9:13 for if the blood of bull and of goats, and the ash of an
heif sprinkl the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifi of the
flesh: 9:14 how much more shall the blood of christ, who through the
etern spirit offer himself without spot to god, purg your
consci from dead work to serv the live god?  9:15 and for this
caus he is the mediat of the new testament, that by mean of death,
for the redempt of the transgress that were under the first
testament, they which are call might receiv the promis of eternal
inheritance.

9:16 for where a testament is, there must also of necess be the
death of the testator.

9:17 for a testament is of forc after men are dead: otherwis it is
of no strength at all while the testat liveth.

9:18 whereupon neither the first testament wa dedic without
blood.

9:19 for when mose had spoken everi precept to all the people
accord to the law, he took the blood of calv and of goats, with
water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkl both the book, and
al the people, 9:20 saying, thi is the blood of the testament which
god hath enjoin unto you.

9:21 moreov he sprinkl with blood both the tabernacle, and all the
vessel of the ministry.

9:22 and almost all thing are by the law purg with blood; and
without shed of blood is no remission.

9:23 It wa therefor necessari that the pattern of thing in the
heaven should be purifi with these; but the heavenli things
themselv with better sacrific than these.

9:24 for christ is not enter into the holi place made with hands,
which are the figur of the true; but into heaven itself, now to
appear in the presenc of god for us: 9:25 nor yet that he should
off himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holi place
everi year with blood of others; 9:26 for then must he often have
suff sinc the foundat of the world: but now onc in the end of
th world hath he appear to put away sin by the sacrific of
himself.

9:27 and as it is appoint unto men onc to die, but after thi the
judgment: 9:28 So christ wa onc offer to bear the sin of many;
and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time
without sin unto salvation.

10:1 for the law have a shadow of good thing to come, and not the
veri imag of the things, can never with those sacrific which they
off year by year continu make the comer thereunto perfect.

10:2 for then would they not have ceas to be offered? becaus that
th worshipp onc purg should have had no more conscienc of
sins.

10:3 but in those sacrific there is a remembr again made of sins
everi year.

10:4 for it is not possibl that the blood of bull and of goats
should take away sins.

10:5 wherefor when he cometh into the world, he saith, sacrific and
off thou wouldest not, but a bodi hast thou prepar me: 10:6 in
burnt offer and sacrific for sin thou hast had no pleasure.

10:7 then said I, lo, I come (in the volum of the book it is written
of me,) to do thi will, O god.

10:8 abov when he said, sacrific and offer and burnt offerings
and offer for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure
therein; which are offer by the law; 10:9 then said he, lo, I come
to do thi will, O god. He taketh away the first, that he may establish
th second.

10:10 By the which will we are sanctifi through the offer of the
bodi of jesu christ onc for all.

10:11 and everi priest standeth daili minist and offering
oftentim the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: 10:12
but thi man, after he had offer one sacrific for sin for ever,
sat down on the right hand of god; 10:13 from henceforth expecting
til hi enemi be made hi footstool.

10:14 for by one offer he hath perfect for ever them that are
sanctified.

10:15 whereof the holi ghost also is a wit to us: for after that
h had said before, 10:16 thi is the coven that I will make with
them after those days, saith the lord, I will put my law into their
hearts, and in their mind will I write them; 10:17 and their sin and
iniqu will I rememb no more.

10:18 now where remiss of these is, there is no more offer for
sin.

10:19 have therefore, brethren, bold to enter into the holiest
bi the blood of jesus, 10:20 By a new and live way, which he hath
consecr for us, through the veil, that is to say, hi flesh; 10:21
and have an high priest over the hous of god; 10:22 let us draw
near with a true heart in full assur of faith, have our hearts
sprinkl from an evil conscience, and our bodi wash with pure
water.

10:23 let us hold fast the profess of our faith without wavering;
(for he is faith that promised;) 10:24 and let us consid one
anoth to provok unto love and to good works: 10:25 not forsaking
th assembl of ourselv together, as the manner of some is; but
exhort one another: and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching.

10:26 for if we sin wil after that we have receiv the knowledge
of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrific for sins, 10:27 but a
certain fear look for of judgment and fieri indignation, which
shal devour the adversaries.

10:28 He that despis moses' law die without merci under two or
thre witnesses: 10:29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppos ye, shall
h be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the son of god, and
hath count the blood of the covenant, wherewith he wa sanctified,
an unholi thing, and hath done despit unto the spirit of grace?
10:30 for we know him that hath said, vengeanc belongeth unto me, i
wil recompense, saith the lord. and again, the lord shall judg his
people.

10:31 It is a fear thing to fall into the hand of the live god.

10:32 but call to remembr the former days, in which, after ye were
illuminated, ye endur a great fight of afflictions; 10:33 partly,
whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproach and afflictions;
and partly, whilst ye becam companion of them that were so used.

10:34 for ye had compass of me in my bonds, and took joy the
spoil of your goods, know in yourselv that ye have in heaven a
bett and an endur substance.

10:35 cast not away therefor your confidence, which hath great
recomp of reward.

10:36 for ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will
of god, ye might receiv the promise.

10:37 for yet a littl while, and he that shall come will come, and
wil not tarry.

10:38 now the just shall live by faith: but if ani man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasur in him.

10:39 but we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them
that believ to the save of the soul.

11:1 now faith is the substanc of thing hope for, the evid of
th not seen.

11:2 for by it the elder obtain a good report.

11:3 through faith we understand that the world were frame by the
word of god, so that thing which are seen were not made of things
which do appear.

11:4 By faith abel offer unto god a more excel sacrific than
cain, by which he obtain wit that he wa righteous, god
testifi of hi gifts: and by it he be dead yet speaketh.

11:5 By faith enoch wa translat that he should not see death; and
wa not found, becaus god had translat him: for befor his
transl he had thi testimony, that he pleas god.

11:6 but without faith it is imposs to pleas him: for he that
cometh to god must believ that he is, and that he is a reward of
them that dilig seek him.

11:7 By faith noah, be warn of god of thing not seen as yet,
mov with fear, prepar an ark to the save of hi house; by the
which he condemn the world, and becam heir of the righteousness
which is by faith.

11:8 By faith abraham, when he wa call to go out into a place which
h should after receiv for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out,
not know whither he went.

11:9 By faith he sojourn in the land of promise, as in a strange
country, dwell in tabernacl with isaac and jacob, the heir with
him of the same promise: 11:10 for he look for a citi which hath
foundations, whose builder and maker is god.

11:11 through faith also sara herself receiv strength to conceive
seed, and wa deliv of a child when she wa past age, becaus she
judg him faith who had promised.

11:12 therefor sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so
mani as the star of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by
th sea shore innumerable.

11:13 these all die in faith, not have receiv the promises, but
hav seen them afar off, and were persuad of them, and embraced
them, and confess that they were stranger and pilgrim on the
earth.

11:14 for they that say such thing declar plainli that they seek a
country.

11:15 and truly, if they had been mind of that countri from whence
they came out, they might have had opportun to have returned.

11:16 but now they desir a better country, that is, an heavenly:
wherefor god is not asham to be call their god: for he hath
prepar for them a city.

11:17 By faith abraham, when he wa tried, offer up isaac: and he
that had receiv the promis offer up hi onli begotten son, 11:18
of whom it wa said, that in isaac shall thi seed be called: 11:19
account that god wa abl to rais him up, even from the dead; from
whenc also he receiv him in a figure.

11:20 By faith isaac bless jacob and esau concern thing to come.

11:21 By faith jacob, when he wa a dying, bless both the son of
joseph; and worshipped, lean upon the top of hi staff.

11:22 By faith joseph, when he died, made mention of the depart of
th children of israel; and gave command concern hi bones.

11:23 By faith moses, when he wa born, wa hid three month of his
parents, becaus they saw he wa a proper child; and they were not
afraid of the king' commandment.

11:24 By faith moses, when he wa come to years, refus to be called
th son of pharaoh' daughter; 11:25 choos rather to suffer
afflict with the peopl of god, than to enjoy the pleasur of sin
for a season; 11:26 esteem the reproach of christ greater riches
than the treasur in egypt: for he had respect unto the recomp of
th reward.

11:27 By faith he forsook egypt, not fear the wrath of the king:
for he endured, as see him who is invisible.

11:28 through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkl of blood,
lest he that destroy the firstborn should touch them.

11:29 By faith they pass through the red sea as by dri land: which
th egyptian assay to do were drowned.

11:30 By faith the wall of jericho fell down, after they were
compass about seven days.

11:31 By faith the harlot rahab perish not with them that believed
not, when she had receiv the spi with peace.

11:32 and what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of
gedeon, and of barak, and of samson, and of jephthae; of david also,
and samuel, and of the prophets: 11:33 who through faith subdued
kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtain promises, stop the mouths
of lions.

11:34 quench the violenc of fire, escap the edg of the sword,
out of weak were made strong, wax valiant in fight, turn to
flight the armi of the aliens.

11:35 women receiv their dead rais to life again: and other were
tortured, not accept deliverance; that they might obtain a better
resurrection: 11:36 and other had trial of cruel mock and
scourgings, yea, moreov of bond and imprisonment: 11:37 they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
sword: they wander about in sheepskin and goatskins; being
destitute, afflicted, tormented; 11:38 (of whom the world wa not
worthy:) they wander in deserts, and in mountains, and in den and
cav of the earth.

11:39 and these all, have obtain a good report through faith,
receiv not the promise: 11:40 god have provid some better thing
for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.

12:1 wherefor see we also are compass about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay asid everi weight, and the sin which
doth so easili beset us, and let us run with patienc the race that is
set befor us, 12:2 look unto jesu the author and finish of our
faith; who for the joy that wa set befor him endur the cross,
despis the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne
of god.

12:3 for consid him that endur such contradict of sinners
against himself, lest ye be weari and faint in your minds.

12:4 Ye have not yet resist unto blood, strive against sin.

12:5 and ye have forgotten the exhort which speaketh unto you as
unto children, My son, despis not thou the chasten of the lord,
nor faint when thou art rebuk of him: 12:6 for whom the lord loveth
h chasteneth, and scourgeth everi son whom he receiveth.

12:7 If ye endur chastening, god dealeth with you as with sons; for
what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?  12:8 but if ye be
without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards,
and not sons.

12:9 furthermor we have had father of our flesh which correct us,
and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection
unto the father of spirits, and live?  12:10 for they verili for a few
day chasten us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit,
that we might be partak of hi holiness.

12:11 now no chasten for the present seemeth to be joyous, but
grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceabl fruit of
right unto them which are exercis thereby.

12:12 wherefor lift up the hand which hang down, and the feeble
knees; 12:13 and make straight path for your feet, lest that which is
lam be turn out of the way; but let it rather be healed.

12:14 follow peac with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shal see the lord: 12:15 look dilig lest ani man fail of the
grac of god; lest ani root of bitter spring up troubl you,
and therebi mani be defiled; 12:16 lest there be ani fornicator, or
profan person, as esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright.

12:17 for ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherit the
blessing, he wa rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though
h sought it care with tears.

12:18 for ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and
that burn with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
12:19 and the sound of a trumpet, and the voic of words; which voice
they that heard intreat that the word should not be spoken to them
ani more: 12:20 (for they could not endur that which wa commanded,
and if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or
thrust through with a dart: 12:21 and so terribl wa the sight, that
mos said, I exceedingli fear and quake:) 12:22 but ye are come unto
mount sion, and unto the citi of the live god, the heavenly
jerusalem, and to an innumer compani of angels, 12:23 To the
gener assembl and church of the firstborn, which are written in
heaven, and to god the judg of all, and to the spirit of just men
mad perfect, 12:24 and to jesu the mediat of the new covenant, and
to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better thing than that of
abel.

12:25 see that ye refus not him that speaketh. for if they escaped
not who refus him that spake on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven: 12:26
whose voic then shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying,
yet onc more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.

12:27 and thi word, yet onc more, signifieth the remov of those
th that are shaken, as of thing that are made, that those things
which cannot be shaken may remain.

12:28 wherefor we receiv a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us
hav grace, wherebi we may serv god accept with rever and
godli fear: 12:29 for our god is a consum fire.

13:1 let brotherli love continue.

13:2 Be not forget to entertain strangers: for therebi some have
entertain angel unawares.

13:3 rememb them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them
which suffer adversity, as be yourselv also in the body.

13:4 marriag is honour in all, and the bed undefiled: but
whoremong and adulter god will judge.

13:5 let your convers be without covetousness; and be content
with such thing as ye have: for he hath said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsak thee.

13:6 So that we may boldli say, the lord is my helper, and I will not
fear what man shall do unto me.

13:7 rememb them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
y the word of god: whose faith follow, consid the end of their
conversation.

13:8 jesu christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

13:9 Be not carri about with diver and strang doctrines. for it is
a good thing that the heart be establish with grace; not with meats,
which have not profit them that have been occupi therein.

13:10 We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve
th tabernacle.

13:11 for the bodi of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the
sanctuari by the high priest for sin, are burn without the camp.

13:12 wherefor jesu also, that he might sanctifi the peopl with his
own blood, suffer without the gate.

13:13 let us go forth therefor unto him without the camp, bear his
reproach.

13:14 for here have we no continu city, but we seek one to come.

13:15 By him therefor let us offer the sacrific of prais to god
continually, that is, the fruit of our lip give thank to hi name.

13:16 but to do good and to commun forget not: for with such
sacrific god is well pleased.

13:17 obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves:
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable
for you.

13:18 pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all
th will to live honestly.

13:19 but I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored
to you the sooner.

13:20 now the god of peace, that brought again from the dead our lord
jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlast covenant, 13:21 make you perfect in everi good work to do
hi will, work in you that which is wellpleas in hi sight,
through jesu christ; to whom be glori for ever and ever. amen.

13:22 and I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation: for
i have written a letter unto you in few words.

13:23 know ye that our brother timothi is set at liberty; with whom,
if he come shortly, I will see you.

13:24 salut all them that have the rule over you, and all the saints.

they of itali salut you.

13:25 grace be with you all. amen.




th gener epistl of james


1:1 james, a servant of god and of the lord jesu christ,
to the twelv tribe which are scatter abroad, greeting.

1:2 My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers
temptations; 1:3 know this, that the tri of your faith worketh
patience.

1:4 but let patienc have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, want nothing.

1:5 If ani of you lack wisdom, let him ask of god, that giveth to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

1:6 but let him ask in faith, noth wavering. for he that wavereth
i like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.

1:7 for let not that man think that he shall receiv ani thing of the
lord.

1:8 A doubl mind man is unstabl in all hi ways.

1:9 let the brother of low degre rejoic in that he is exalted: 1:10
but the rich, in that he is made low: becaus as the flower of the
grass he shall pass away.

1:11 for the sun is no sooner risen with a burn heat, but it
withereth the grass, and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of
th fashion of it perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade away in
hi ways.

1:12 bless is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receiv the crown of life, which the lord hath
promis to them that love him.

1:13 let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempt of god: for god
cannot be tempt with evil, neither tempteth he ani man: 1:14 but
everi man is tempted, when he is drawn away of hi own lust, and
enticed.

1:15 then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin,
when it is finished, bringeth forth death.

1:16 Do not err, my belov brethren.

1:17 everi good gift and everi perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning.

1:18 Of hi own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we
should be a kind of firstfruit of hi creatures.

1:19 wherefore, my belov brethren, let everi man be swift to hear,
slow to speak, slow to wrath: 1:20 for the wrath of man worketh not
th righteous of god.

1:21 wherefor lay apart all filthi and superflu of
naughtiness, and receiv with meek the engraft word, which is
abl to save your souls.

1:22 but be ye doer of the word, and not hearer only, deceiv your
own selves.

1:23 for if ani be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like
unto a man behold hi natur face in a glass: 1:24 for he
beholdeth himself, and goeth hi way, and straightway forgetteth what
mann of man he was.

1:25 but whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth
therein, he be not a forget hearer, but a doer of the work, this
man shall be bless in hi deed.

1:26 If ani man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceiveth hi own heart, thi man' religion is vain.

1:27 pure religion and undefil befor god and the father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspot from the world.

2:1 My brethren, have not the faith of our lord jesu christ, the lord
of glory, with respect of persons.

2:2 for if there come unto your assembl a man with a gold ring, in
goodli apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; 2:3
and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto
him, sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, stand thou
there, or sit here under my footstool: 2:4 are ye not then partial in
yourselves, and are becom judg of evil thoughts?  2:5 hearken, my
belov brethren, hath not god chosen the poor of thi world rich in
faith, and heir of the kingdom which he hath promis to them that
lov him?  2:6 but ye have despis the poor. Do not rich men oppress
you, and draw you befor the judgment seats?  2:7 Do not they
blasphem that worthi name by the which ye are called?  2:8 If ye
fulfil the royal law accord to the scripture, thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself, ye do well: 2:9 but if ye have respect to
persons, ye commit sin, and are convinc of the law as transgressors.

2:10 for whosoev shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilti of all.

2:11 for he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill.
now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art becom a
transgressor of the law.

2:12 So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judg by the law
of liberty.

2:13 for he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shew no
mercy; and merci rejoiceth against judgment.

2:14 what doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith,
and have not works? can faith save him?  2:15 If a brother or sister
b naked, and destitut of daili food, 2:16 and one of you say unto
them, depart in peace, be ye warm and filled; notwithstand ye
giv them not those thing which are need to the body; what doth it
profit?  2:17 even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being
alone.

2:18 yea, a man may say, thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me
thi faith without thi works, and I will shew thee my faith by my
works.

2:19 thou believest that there is one god; thou doest well: the devils
also believe, and tremble.

2:20 but wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without work is dead?
2:21 wa not abraham our father justifi by works, when he had
off isaac hi son upon the altar?  2:22 seest thou how faith
wrought with hi works, and by work wa faith made perfect?  2:23 and
th scriptur wa fulfil which saith, abraham believ god, and it
wa imput unto him for righteousness: and he wa call the friend
of god.

2:24 Ye see then how that by work a man is justified, and not by
faith only.

2:25 likewis also wa not rahab the harlot justifi by works, when
sh had receiv the messengers, and had sent them out anoth way?
2:26 for as the bodi without the spirit is dead, so faith without
work is dead also.

3:1 My brethren, be not mani masters, know that we shall receive
th greater condemnation.

3:2 for in mani thing we offend all. If ani man offend not in word,
th same is a perfect man, and abl also to bridl the whole body.

3:3 behold, we put bit in the horses' mouths, that they may obey us;
and we turn about their whole body.

3:4 behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are
driven of fierc winds, yet are they turn about with a veri small
helm, whithersoev the governor listeth.

3:5 even so the tongu is a littl member, and boasteth great things.

behold, how great a matter a littl fire kindleth!  3:6 and the tongue
i a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongu among our members,
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the cours of
nature; and it is set on fire of hell.

3:7 for everi kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of
th in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tame of mankind: 3:8 but
th tongu can no man tame; it is an unruli evil, full of deadly
poison.

3:9 therewith bless we god, even the father; and therewith curs we
men, which are made after the similitud of god.

3:10 out of the same mouth proceedeth bless and cursing. my
brethren, these thing ought not so to be.

3:11 doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and
bitter?  3:12 can the fig tree, my brethren, bear oliv berries?
eith a vine, figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and
fresh.

3:13 who is a wise man and endu with knowledg among you? let him
shew out of a good convers hi work with meek of wisdom.

3:14 but if ye have bitter envi and strife in your hearts, glory
not, and lie not against the truth.

3:15 thi wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish.

3:16 for where envi and strife is, there is confus and every
evil work.

3:17 but the wisdom that is from abov is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easi to be intreated, full of merci and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

3:18 and the fruit of righteous is sown in peac of them that make
peace.

4:1 from whenc come war and fight among you? come they not
hence, even of your lust that war in your members?  4:2 Ye lust, and
hav not: ye kill, and desir to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and
war, yet ye have not, becaus ye ask not.

4:3 Ye ask, and receiv not, becaus ye ask amiss, that ye may consume
it upon your lusts.

4:4 Ye adulter and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of
th world is enmiti with god? whosoev therefor will be a friend of
th world is the enemi of god.

4:5 Do ye think that the scriptur saith in vain, the spirit that
dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?  4:6 but he giveth more grace.
wherefor he saith, god resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the
humble.

4:7 submit yourselv therefor to god. resist the devil, and he will
fle from you.

4:8 draw nigh to god, and he will draw nigh to you. cleans your
hands, ye sinners; and purifi your hearts, ye doubl minded.

4:9 Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turn to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness.

4:10 humbl yourselv in the sight of the lord, and he shall lift you
up.

4:11 speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh evil of
hi brother, and judgeth hi brother, speaketh evil of the law, and
judgeth the law: but if thou judg the law, thou art not a doer of the
law, but a judge.

4:12 there is one lawgiver, who is abl to save and to destroy: who
art thou that judgest another?  4:13 Go to now, ye that say, To day or
to morrow we will go into such a city, and continu there a year, and
buy and sell, and get gain: 4:14 wherea ye know not what shall be on
th morrow. for what is your life? It is even a vapour, that appeareth
for a littl time, and then vanisheth away.

4:15 for that ye ought to say, If the lord will, we shall live, and do
this, or that.

4:16 but now ye rejoic in your boastings: all such rejoic is evil.

4:17 therefor to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to
him it is sin.

5:1 Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseri that shall
com upon you.

5:2 your rich are corrupted, and your garment are motheaten.

5:3 your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a
wit against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have
heap treasur togeth for the last days.

5:4 behold, the hire of the labour who have reap down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cri of
them which have reap are enter into the ear of the lord of
sabaoth.

5:5 Ye have live in pleasur on the earth, and been wanton; ye have
nourish your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

5:6 Ye have condemn and kill the just; and he doth not resist you.

5:7 Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the come of the lord.

behold, the husbandman waiteth for the preciou fruit of the earth,
and hath long patienc for it, until he receiv the earli and latter
rain.

5:8 Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the come of the
lord draweth nigh.

5:9 grudg not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned:
behold, the judg standeth befor the door.

5:10 take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of
th lord, for an exampl of suffer affliction, and of patience.

5:11 behold, we count them happi which endure. Ye have heard of the
pati of job, and have seen the end of the lord; that the lord is
veri pitiful, and of tender mercy.

5:12 but abov all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
neith by the earth, neither by ani other oath: but let your yea be
yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.

5:13 Is ani among you afflicted? let him pray. Is ani merry? let him
s psalms.

5:14 Is ani sick among you? let him call for the elder of the church;
and let them pray over him, anoint him with oil in the name of the
lord: 5:15 and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the lord
shal rais him up; and if he have commit sins, they shall be
forgiven him.

5:16 confess your fault one to another, and pray one for another,
that ye may be healed. the effectu fervent prayer of a righteou man
availeth much.

5:17 elia wa a man subject to like passion as we are, and he prayed
earnestli that it might not rain: and it rain not on the earth by
th space of three year and six months.

5:18 and he pray again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.

5:19 brethren, if ani of you do err from the truth, and one convert
him; 5:20 let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the
error of hi way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitud of sins.




th first epistl gener of peter


1:1 peter, an apostl of jesu christ, to the stranger scattered
throughout pontus, galatia, cappadocia, asia, and bithynia, 1:2 elect
accord to the foreknowledg of god the father, through
sanctif of the spirit, unto obedi and sprinkl of the
blood of jesu christ: grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied.

1:3 bless be the god and father of our lord jesu christ, which
accord to hi abund merci hath begotten us again unto a lively
hop by the resurrect of jesu christ from the dead, 1:4 To an
inherit incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away,
reserv in heaven for you, 1:5 who are kept by the power of god
through faith unto salvat readi to be reveal in the last time.

1:6 wherein ye greatli rejoice, though now for a season, if need be,
y are in heavi through manifold temptations: 1:7 that the trial
of your faith, be much more preciou than of gold that perisheth,
though it be tri with fire, might be found unto prais and honour
and glori at the appear of jesu christ: 1:8 whom have not seen,
y love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeak and full of glory: 1:9 receiv the end of your
faith, even the salvat of your souls.

1:10 Of which salvat the prophet have enquir and searched
diligently, who prophesi of the grace that should come unto you:
1:11 search what, or what manner of time the spirit of christ which
wa in them did signify, when it testifi beforehand the sufferings
of christ, and the glori that should follow.

1:12 unto whom it wa revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minist the things, which are now report unto you by them
that have preach the gospel unto you with the holi ghost sent down
from heaven; which thing the angel desir to look into.

1:13 wherefor gird up the loin of your mind, be sober, and hope to
th end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation
of jesu christ; 1:14 As obedi children, not fashion yourselves
accord to the former lust in your ignorance: 1:15 but as he which
hath call you is holy, so be ye holi in all manner of conversation;
1:16 becaus it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy.

1:17 and if ye call on the father, who without respect of persons
judgeth accord to everi man' work, pass the time of your
sojourn here in fear: 1:18 forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeem with corrupt things, as silver and gold, from your vain
convers receiv by tradit from your fathers; 1:19 but with
th preciou blood of christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without
spot: 1:20 who verili wa foreordain befor the foundat of the
world, but wa manifest in these last time for you, 1:21 who by him
do believ in god, that rais him up from the dead, and gave him
glory; that your faith and hope might be in god.

1:22 see ye have purifi your soul in obey the truth through
th spirit unto unfeign love of the brethren, see that ye love one
anoth with a pure heart fervently: 1:23 be born again, not of
corrupt seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of god, which
liveth and abideth for ever.

1:24 for all flesh is as grass, and all the glori of man as the flower
of grass. the grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away:
1:25 but the word of the lord endureth for ever. and thi is the word
which by the gospel is preach unto you.

2:1 wherefor lay asid all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies,
and envies, all evil speakings, 2:2 As newborn babes, desir the
sincer milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: 2:3 If so be ye
hav tast that the lord is gracious.

2:4 To whom coming, as unto a live stone, disallow inde of men,
but chosen of god, and precious, 2:5 Ye also, as live stones, are
built up a spiritu house, an holi priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, accept to god by jesu christ.

2:6 wherefor also it is contain in the scripture, behold, I lay in
sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on
him shall not be confounded.

2:7 unto you therefor which believ he is precious: but unto them
which be disobedient, the stone which the builder disallowed, the
sam is made the head of the corner, 2:8 and a stone of stumbling, and
a rock of offence, even to them which stumbl at the word, being
disobedient: whereunto also they were appointed.

2:9 but ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the prais of
him who hath call you out of dark into hi marvel light;
2:10 which in time past were not a people, but are now the peopl of
god: which had not obtain mercy, but now have obtain mercy.

2:11 dearli beloved, I beseech you as stranger and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshli lusts, which war against the soul; 2:12 have your
convers honest among the gentiles: that, wherea they speak
against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they
shal behold, glorifi god in the day of visitation.

2:13 submit yourselv to everi ordin of man for the lord' sake:
wheth it be to the king, as supreme; 2:14 Or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent by him for the punish of evildoers, and for the
prais of them that do well.

2:15 for so is the will of god, that with well do ye may put to
sil the ignor of foolish men: 2:16 As free, and not use your
liberti for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servant of god.

2:17 honour all men. love the brotherhood. fear god. honour the king.

2:18 servants, be subject to your master with all fear; not onli to
th good and gentle, but also to the froward.

2:19 for thi is thankworthy, if a man for conscienc toward god
endur grief, suffer wrongfully.

2:20 for what glori is it, if, when ye be buffet for your faults, ye
shal take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it,
y take it patiently, thi is accept with god.

2:21 for even hereunto were ye called: becaus christ also suffered
for us, leav us an example, that ye should follow hi steps: 2:22
who did no sin, neither wa guil found in hi mouth: 2:23 who, when
h wa reviled, revil not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not; but commit himself to him that judgeth righteously: 2:24 who
hi own self bare our sin in hi own bodi on the tree, that we, being
dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripe ye were
healed.

2:25 for ye were as sheep go astray; but are now return unto the
shepherd and bishop of your souls.

3:1 likewise, ye wives, be in subject to your own husbands; that,
if ani obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the
convers of the wives; 3:2 while they behold your chaste
convers coupl with fear.

3:3 whose adorn let it not be that outward adorn of plait the
hair, and of wear of gold, or of put on of apparel; 3:4 but let
it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of
god of great price.

3:5 for after thi manner in the old time the holi women also, who
trust in god, adorn themselves, be in subject unto their own
husbands: 3:6 even as sara obey abraham, call him lord: whose
daught ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any
amazement.

3:7 likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them accord to knowledge,
giv honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being
heir togeth of the grace of life; that your prayer be not
hindered.

3:8 finally, be ye all of one mind, have compass one of another,
lov as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: 3:9 not render evil for
evil, or rail for railing: but contrariwis blessing; know that
y are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.

3:10 for he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain
hi tongu from evil, and hi lip that they speak no guile: 3:11 let
him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensu it.

3:12 for the eye of the lord are over the righteous, and hi ear are
open unto their prayers: but the face of the lord is against them that
do evil.

3:13 and who is he that will harm you, if ye be follow of that
which is good?  3:14 but and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake,
happi are ye: and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;
3:15 but sanctifi the lord god in your hearts: and be readi alway to
giv an answer to everi man that asketh you a reason of the hope that
i in you with meek and fear: 3:16 have a good conscience; that,
wherea they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed
that fals accus your good convers in christ.

3:17 for it is better, if the will of god be so, that ye suffer for
wel doing, than for evil doing.

3:18 for christ also hath onc suffer for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to god, be put to death in the
flesh, but quicken by the spirit: 3:19 By which also he went and
preach unto the spirit in prison; 3:20 which sometim were
disobedient, when onc the longsuff of god wait in the day of
noah, while the ark wa a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls
wer save by water.

3:21 the like figur whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not
th put away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
consci toward god,) by the resurrect of jesu christ: 3:22 who
i gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of god; angel and
author and power be made subject unto him.

4:1 forasmuch then as christ hath suffer for us in the flesh, arm
yourselv likewis with the same mind: for he that hath suffer in
th flesh hath ceas from sin; 4:2 that he no longer should live the
rest of hi time in the flesh to the lust of men, but to the will of
god.

4:3 for the time past of our life may suffic us to have wrought the
wil of the gentiles, when we walk in lasciviousness, lusts, excess
of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abomin idolatries: 4:4
wherein they think it strang that ye run not with them to the same
excess of riot, speak evil of you: 4:5 who shall give account to
him that is readi to judg the quick and the dead.

4:6 for for thi caus wa the gospel preach also to them that are
dead, that they might be judg accord to men in the flesh, but
liv accord to god in the spirit.

4:7 but the end of all thing is at hand: be ye therefor sober, and
watch unto prayer.

4:8 and abov all thing have fervent chariti among yourselves: for
char shall cover the multitud of sins.

4:9 use hospit one to anoth without grudging.

4:10 As everi man hath receiv the gift, even so minist the same
on to another, as good steward of the manifold grace of god.

4:11 If ani man speak, let him speak as the oracl of god; if ani man
minister, let him do it as of the abil which god giveth: that god
in all thing may be glorifi through jesu christ, to whom be praise
and dominion for ever and ever. amen.

4:12 beloved, think it not strang concern the fieri trial which is
to tri you, as though some strang thing happen unto you: 4:13 but
rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partak of christ' sufferings; that,
when hi glori shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding
joy.

4:14 If ye be reproach for the name of christ, happi are ye; for the
spirit of glori and of god resteth upon you: on their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.

4:15 but let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evildoer, or as a busybodi in other men' matters.

4:16 yet if ani man suffer as a christian, let him not be ashamed; but
let him glorifi god on thi behalf.

4:17 for the time is come that judgment must begin at the hous of
god: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that
obey not the gospel of god?  4:18 and if the righteou scarc be
saved, where shall the ungodli and the sinner appear?  4:19 wherefore
let them that suffer accord to the will of god commit the keeping
of their soul to him in well doing, as unto a faith creator.

5:1 the elder which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and
a wit of the suffer of christ, and also a partak of the
glori that shall be revealed: 5:2 feed the flock of god which is among
you, take the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthi lucre, but of a readi mind; 5:3 neither as be lords
ov god' heritage, but be ensampl to the flock.

5:4 and when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receiv a crown
of glori that fadeth not away.

5:5 likewise, ye younger, submit yourselv unto the elder. yea, all
of you be subject one to another, and be cloth with humility: for
god resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.

5:6 humbl yourselv therefor under the mighti hand of god, that he
may exalt you in due time: 5:7 cast all your care upon him; for he
careth for you.

5:8 Be sober, be vigilant; becaus your adversari the devil, as a
roar lion, walketh about, seek whom he may devour: 5:9 whom
resist stedfast in the faith, know that the same afflict are
accomplish in your brethren that are in the world.

5:10 but the god of all grace, who hath call us unto hi eternal
glori by christ jesus, after that ye have suffer a while, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settl you.

5:11 To him be glori and dominion for ever and ever. amen.

5:12 By silvanus, a faith brother unto you, as I suppose, I have
written briefly, exhorting, and testifi that thi is the true grace
of god wherein ye stand.

5:13 the church that is at babylon, elect togeth with you,
saluteth you; and so doth marcu my son.

5:14 greet ye one anoth with a kiss of charity. peac be with you
al that are in christ jesus. amen.




th second gener epistl of peter


1:1 simon peter, a servant and an apostl of jesu christ, to them
that have obtain like preciou faith with us through the
right of god and our saviour jesu christ: 1:2 grace and peace
b multipli unto you through the knowledg of god, and of jesu our
lord, 1:3 accord as hi divin power hath given unto us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledg of him
that hath call us to glori and virtue: 1:4 wherebi are given unto us
exceed great and preciou promises: that by these ye might be
partak of the divin nature, have escap the corrupt that is
in the world through lust.

1:5 and besid this, give all diligence, add to your faith virtue;
and to virtu knowledge; 1:6 and to knowledg temperance; and to
temper patience; and to patienc godliness; 1:7 and to godliness
brotherli kindness; and to brotherli kind charity.

1:8 for if these thing be in you, and abound, they make you that ye
shal neither be barren nor unfruit in the knowledg of our lord
jesu christ.

1:9 but he that lacketh these thing is blind, and cannot see afar
off, and hath forgotten that he wa purg from hi old sins.

1:10 wherefor the rather, brethren, give dilig to make your
cal and elect sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall: 1:11 for so an entranc shall be minist unto you abundantly
into the everlast kingdom of our lord and saviour jesu christ.

1:12 wherefor I will not be neglig to put you alway in
remembr of these things, though ye know them, and be established
in the present truth.

1:13 yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in thi tabernacle, to stir
you up by put you in remembrance; 1:14 know that shortli I must
put off thi my tabernacle, even as our lord jesu christ hath shewed
me.

1:15 moreov I will endeavour that ye may be abl after my deceas to
hav these thing alway in remembrance.

1:16 for we have not follow cunningli devis fables, when we made
known unto you the power and come of our lord jesu christ, but were
eyewit of hi majesty.

1:17 for he receiv from god the father honour and glory, when there
cam such a voic to him from the excel glory, thi is my beloved
son, in whom I am well pleased.

1:18 and thi voic which came from heaven we heard, when we were with
him in the holi mount.

1:19 We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until
th day dawn, and the day star aris in your hearts: 1:20 know this
first, that no propheci of the scriptur is of ani private
interpretation.

1:21 for the propheci came not in old time by the will of man: but
holi men of god spake as they were move by the holi ghost.

2:1 but there were fals prophet also among the people, even as there
shal be fals teacher among you, who privili shall bring in damnable
heresies, even deni the lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselv swift destruction.

2:2 and mani shall follow their pernici ways; by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

2:3 and through covet shall they with feign word make
merchandis of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not,
and their damnat slumbereth not.

2:4 for if god spare not the angel that sinned, but cast them down
to hell, and deliv them into chain of darkness, to be reserved
unto judgment; 2:5 and spare not the old world, but save noah the
eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bring in the flood upon
th world of the ungodly; 2:6 and turn the citi of sodom and
gomorrha into ash condemn them with an overthrow, make them an
ensampl unto those that after should live ungodly; 2:7 and delivered
just lot, vex with the filthi convers of the wicked: 2:8 (for
that righteou man dwell among them, in see and hearing, vexed
hi righteou soul from day to day with their unlaw deeds;) 2:9 the
lord knoweth how to deliv the godli out of temptations, and to
reserv the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished: 2:10 but
chiefli them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and
despis government. presumptu are they, selfwilled, they are not
afraid to speak evil of dignities.

2:11 wherea angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not
rail accus against them befor the lord.

2:12 but these, as natur brute beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of the thing that they understand not; and
shal utterli perish in their own corruption; 2:13 and shall receive
th reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasur to riot
in the day time. spot they are and blemishes, sport themselves
with their own deceiv while they feast with you; 2:14 have eyes
ful of adultery, and that cannot ceas from sin; beguil unstable
souls: an heart they have exercis with covet practices; cursed
children: 2:15 which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray,
follow the way of balaam the son of bosor, who love the wage of
unrighteousness; 2:16 but wa rebuk for hi iniquity: the dumb ass
speak with man' voic forbad the mad of the prophet.

2:17 these are well without water, cloud that are carri with a
tempest; to whom the mist of dark is reserv for ever.

2:18 for when they speak great swell word of vanity, they allure
through the lust of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that
wer clean escap from them who live in error.

2:19 while they promis them liberty, they themselv are the servants
of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage.

2:20 for if after they have escap the pollut of the world
through the knowledg of the lord and saviour jesu christ, they are
again entangl therein, and overcome, the latter end is wors with
them than the beginning.

2:21 for it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy
command deliv unto them.

2:22 but it is happen unto them accord to the true proverb, the
dog is turn to hi own vomit again; and the sow that wa wash to
her wallow in the mire.

3:1 thi second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which
i stir up your pure mind by way of remembrance: 3:2 that ye may be
mind of the word which were spoken befor by the holi prophets,
and of the command of us the apostl of the lord and saviour: 3:3
know thi first, that there shall come in the last day scoffers,
walk after their own lusts, 3:4 and saying, where is the promis of
hi coming? for sinc the father fell asleep, all thing continu as
they were from the begin of the creation.

3:5 for thi they willingli are ignor of, that by the word of god
th heaven were of old, and the earth stand out of the water and
in the water: 3:6 wherebi the world that then was, be overflowed
with water, perished: 3:7 but the heaven and the earth, which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserv unto fire against
th day of judgment and perdit of ungodli men.

3:8 but, beloved, be not ignor of thi one thing, that one day is
with the lord as a thousand years, and a thousand year as one day.

3:9 the lord is not slack concern hi promise, as some men count
slackness; but is longsuff to us-ward, not will that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

3:10 but the day of the lord will come as a thief in the night; in the
which the heaven shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shal melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the work that are
therein shall be burn up.

3:11 see then that all these thing shall be dissolved, what manner
of person ought ye to be in all holi convers and godliness, 3:12
look for and hast unto the come of the day of god, wherein the
heaven be on fire shall be dissolved, and the element shall melt
with fervent heat?  3:13 nevertheless we, accord to hi promise,
look for new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.

3:14 wherefore, beloved, see that ye look for such things, be
dilig that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and
blameless.

3:15 and account that the longsuff of our lord is salvation; even
a our belov brother paul also accord to the wisdom given unto
him hath written unto you; 3:16 As also in all hi epistles, speaking
in them of these things; in which are some thing hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearn and unstabl wrest, as they
do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction.

3:17 Ye therefore, beloved, see ye know these thing before, beware
lest ye also, be led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own stedfastness.

3:18 but grow in grace, and in the knowledg of our lord and saviour
jesu christ. To him be glori both now and for ever. amen.




th first epistl gener of john


1:1 that which wa from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
hav seen with our eyes, which we have look upon, and our hand have
handled, of the word of life; 1:2 (for the life wa manifested, and we
hav seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that etern life,
which wa with the father, and wa manifest unto us;) 1:3 that which
w have seen and heard declar we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us: and truli our fellowship is with the father, and
with hi son jesu christ.

1:4 and these thing write we unto you, that your joy may be full.

1:5 thi then is the messag which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that god is light, and in him is no dark at all.

1:6 If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
w lie, and do not the truth: 1:7 but if we walk in the light, as he
i in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
jesu christ hi son cleanseth us from all sin.

1:8 If we say that we have no sin, we deceiv ourselves, and the truth
i not in us.

1:9 If we confess our sins, he is faith and just to forgiv us our
sins, and to cleans us from all unrighteousness.

1:10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us.

2:1 My littl children, these thing write I unto you, that ye sin
not.

and if ani man sin, we have an advoc with the father, jesu christ
th righteous: 2:2 and he is the propiti for our sins: and not
for our' only, but also for the sin of the whole world.

2:3 and herebi we do know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments.

2:4 He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not hi commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him.

2:5 but whoso keepeth hi word, in him verili is the love of god
perfected: herebi know we that we are in him.

2:6 He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk,
even as he walked.

2:7 brethren, I write no new command unto you, but an old
command which ye had from the beginning. the old command is
th word which ye have heard from the beginning.

2:8 again, a new command I write unto you, which thing is true in
him and in you: becaus the dark is past, and the true light now
shineth.

2:9 He that saith he is in the light, and hateth hi brother, is in
dark even until now.

2:10 He that loveth hi brother abideth in the light, and there is
non occas of stumbl in him.

2:11 but he that hateth hi brother is in darkness, and walketh in
darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, becaus that dark hath
blind hi eyes.

2:12 I write unto you, littl children, becaus your sin are forgiven
y for hi name' sake.

2:13 I write unto you, fathers, becaus ye have known him that is from
th beginning. I write unto you, young men, becaus ye have overcome
th wick one. I write unto you, littl children, becaus ye have
known the father.

2:14 I have written unto you, fathers, becaus ye have known him that
i from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, becaus ye
ar strong, and the word of god abideth in you, and ye have overcome
th wick one.

2:15 love not the world, neither the thing that are in the world. if
ani man love the world, the love of the father is not in him.

2:16 for all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but is of
th world.

2:17 and the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that
doeth the will of god abideth for ever.

2:18 littl children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that
antichrist shall come, even now are there mani antichrists; wherebi we
know that it is the last time.

2:19 they went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continu with us: but they went
out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.

2:20 but ye have an unction from the holi one, and ye know all things.

2:21 I have not written unto you becaus ye know not the truth, but
becaus ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

2:22 who is a liar but he that denieth that jesu is the christ? He is
antichrist, that denieth the father and the son.

2:23 whosoev denieth the son, the same hath not the father: he that
acknowledgeth the son hath the father also.

2:24 let that therefor abid in you, which ye have heard from the
beginning. If that which ye have heard from the begin shall remain
in you, ye also shall continu in the son, and in the father.

2:25 and thi is the promis that he hath promis us, even eternal
life.

2:26 these thing have I written unto you concern them that seduce
you.

2:27 but the anoint which ye have receiv of him abideth in you,
and ye need not that ani man teach you: but as the same anointing
teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as
it hath taught you, ye shall abid in him.

2:28 and now, littl children, abid in him; that, when he shall
appear, we may have confidence, and not be asham befor him at his
coming.

2:29 If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that everi one that
doeth righteous is born of him.

3:1 behold, what manner of love the father hath bestow upon us, that
w should be call the son of god: therefor the world knoweth us
not, becaus it knew him not.

3:2 beloved, now are we the son of god, and it doth not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be
lik him; for we shall see him as he is.

3:3 and everi man that hath thi hope in him purifieth himself, even
a he is pure.

3:4 whosoev committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is
th transgress of the law.

3:5 and ye know that he wa manifest to take away our sins; and in
him is no sin.

3:6 whosoev abideth in him sinneth not: whosoev sinneth hath not
seen him, neither known him.

3:7 littl children, let no man deceiv you: he that doeth
right is righteous, even as he is righteous.

3:8 He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from
th beginning. for thi purpos the son of god wa manifested, that he
might destroy the work of the devil.

3:9 whosoev is born of god doth not commit sin; for hi seed
remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, becaus he is born of god.

3:10 In thi the children of god are manifest, and the children of the
devil: whosoev doeth not righteous is not of god, neither he
that loveth not hi brother.

3:11 for thi is the messag that ye heard from the beginning, that we
should love one another.

3:12 not as cain, who wa of that wick one, and slew hi brother.
and wherefor slew he him? becaus hi own work were evil, and his
brother' righteous.

3:13 marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.

3:14 We know that we have pass from death unto life, becaus we love
th brethren. He that loveth not hi brother abideth in death.

3:15 whosoev hateth hi brother is a murderer: and ye know that no
murder hath etern life abid in him.

3:16 herebi perceiv we the love of god, becaus he laid down hi life
for us: and we ought to lay down our live for the brethren.

3:17 but whoso hath thi world' good, and seeth hi brother have
need, and shutteth up hi bowel of compass from him, how dwelleth
th love of god in him?  3:18 My littl children, let us not love in
word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth.

3:19 and herebi we know that we are of the truth, and shall assur our
heart befor him.

3:20 for if our heart condemn us, god is greater than our heart, and
knoweth all things.

3:21 beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward god.

3:22 and whatsoev we ask, we receiv of him, becaus we keep his
commandments, and do those thing that are pleas in hi sight.

3:23 and thi is hi commandment, that we should believ on the name
of hi son jesu christ, and love one another, as he gave us
commandment.

3:24 and he that keepeth hi command dwelleth in him, and he in
him.

and herebi we know that he abideth in us, by the spirit which he hath
given us.

4:1 beloved, believ not everi spirit, but tri the spirit whether
they are of god: becaus mani fals prophet are gone out into the
world.

4:2 herebi know ye the spirit of god: everi spirit that confesseth
that jesu christ is come in the flesh is of god: 4:3 and everi spirit
that confesseth not that jesu christ is come in the flesh is not of
god: and thi is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that
it should come; and even now alreadi is it in the world.

4:4 Ye are of god, littl children, and have overcom them: because
great is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

4:5 they are of the world: therefor speak they of the world, and the
world heareth them.

4:6 We are of god: he that knoweth god heareth us; he that is not of
god heareth not us. herebi know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit
of error.

4:7 beloved, let us love one another: for love is of god; and every
on that loveth is born of god, and knoweth god.

4:8 He that loveth not knoweth not god; for god is love.

4:9 In thi wa manifest the love of god toward us, becaus that god
sent hi onli begotten son into the world, that we might live through
him.

4:10 herein is love, not that we love god, but that he love us, and
sent hi son to be the propiti for our sins.

4:11 beloved, if god so love us, we ought also to love one another.

4:12 No man hath seen god at ani time. If we love one another, god
dwelleth in us, and hi love is perfect in us.

4:13 herebi know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, becaus he
hath given us of hi spirit.

4:14 and we have seen and do testifi that the father sent the son to
b the saviour of the world.

4:15 whosoev shall confess that jesu is the son of god, god
dwelleth in him, and he in god.

4:16 and we have known and believ the love that god hath to us. god
i love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in god, and god in him.

4:17 herein is our love made perfect, that we may have bold in the
day of judgment: becaus as he is, so are we in thi world.

4:18 there is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear:
becaus fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in
love.

4:19 We love him, becaus he first love us.

4:20 If a man say, I love god, and hateth hi brother, he is a liar:
for he that loveth not hi brother whom he hath seen, how can he love
god whom he hath not seen?  4:21 and thi command have we from
him, that he who loveth god love hi brother also.

5:1 whosoev believeth that jesu is the christ is born of god: and
everi one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten
of him.

5:2 By thi we know that we love the children of god, when we love
god, and keep hi commandments.

5:3 for thi is the love of god, that we keep hi commandments: and
hi command are not grievous.

5:4 for whatsoev is born of god overcometh the world: and thi is
th victori that overcometh the world, even our faith.

5:5 who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that
jesu is the son of god?  5:6 thi is he that came by water and blood,
even jesu christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. and it
i the spirit that beareth witness, becaus the spirit is truth.

5:7 for there are three that bear record in heaven, the father, the
word, and the holi ghost: and these three are one.

5:8 and there are three that bear wit in earth, the spirit, and
th water, and the blood: and these three agre in one.

5:9 If we receiv the wit of men, the wit of god is greater:
for thi is the wit of god which he hath testifi of hi son.

5:10 He that believeth on the son of god hath the wit in himself:
h that believeth not god hath made him a liar; becaus he believeth
not the record that god gave of hi son.

5:11 and thi is the record, that god hath given to us etern life,
and thi life is in hi son.

5:12 He that hath the son hath life; and he that hath not the son of
god hath not life.

5:13 these thing have I written unto you that believ on the name of
th son of god; that ye may know that ye have etern life, and that
y may believ on the name of the son of god.

5:14 and thi is the confid that we have in him, that, if we ask
ani thing accord to hi will, he heareth us: 5:15 and if we know
that he hear us, whatsoev we ask, we know that we have the petitions
that we desir of him.

5:16 If ani man see hi brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he
shal ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death. there is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for
it.

5:17 all unright is sin: and there is a sin not unto death.

5:18 We know that whosoev is born of god sinneth not; but he that is
begotten of god keepeth himself, and that wick one toucheth him not.

5:19 and we know that we are of god, and the whole world lieth in
wickedness.

5:20 and we know that the son of god is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him
that is true, even in hi son jesu christ. thi is the true god, and
etern life.

5:21 littl children, keep yourselv from idols. amen.




th second epistl gener of john


1:1 the elder unto the elect ladi and her children, whom I love in
th truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the
truth; 1:2 for the truth' sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be
with us for ever.

1:3 grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from god the father, and from
th lord jesu christ, the son of the father, in truth and love.

1:4 I rejoic greatli that I found of thi children walk in truth,
a we have receiv a command from the father.

1:5 and now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new
command unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that
w love one another.

1:6 and thi is love, that we walk after hi commandments. thi is the
commandment, that, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk
in it.

1:7 for mani deceiv are enter into the world, who confess not
that jesu christ is come in the flesh. thi is a deceiv and an
antichrist.

1:8 look to yourselves, that we lose not those thing which we have
wrought, but that we receiv a full reward.

1:9 whosoev transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrin of
christ, hath not god. He that abideth in the doctrin of christ, he
hath both the father and the son.

1:10 If there come ani unto you, and bring not thi doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him god speed: 1:11 for he that
biddeth him god speed is partak of hi evil deeds.

1:12 have mani thing to write unto you, I would not write with
pap and ink: but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face,
that our joy may be full.

1:13 the children of thi elect sister greet thee. amen.




th third epistl gener of john


1:1 the elder unto the wellbelov gaius, whom I love in the truth.

1:2 beloved, I wish abov all thing that thou mayest prosper and be
in health, even as thi soul prospereth.

1:3 for I rejoic greatly, when the brethren came and testifi of
th truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.

1:4 I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.

1:5 beloved, thou doest faith whatsoev thou doest to the
brethren, and to strangers; 1:6 which have born wit of thy
char befor the church: whom if thou bring forward on their journey
aft a godli sort, thou shalt do well: 1:7 becaus that for his
name' sake they went forth, take noth of the gentiles.

1:8 We therefor ought to receiv such, that we might be fellowhelpers
to the truth.

1:9 I wrote unto the church: but diotrephes, who loveth to have the
preemin among them, receiveth us not.

1:10 wherefore, if I come, I will rememb hi deed which he doeth,
prat against us with malici words: and not content therewith,
neith doth he himself receiv the brethren, and forbiddeth them that
would, and casteth them out of the church.

1:11 beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good.
h that doeth good is of god: but he that doeth evil hath not seen
god.

1:12 demetriu hath good report of all men, and of the truth itself:
yea, and we also bear record; and ye know that our record is true.

1:13 I had mani thing to write, but I will not with ink and pen write
unto thee: 1:14 but I trust I shall shortli see thee, and we shall
speak face to face. peac be to thee. our friend salut thee. greet
th friend by name.




th gener epistl of jude


1:1 jude, the servant of jesu christ, and brother of james, to them
that are sanctifi by god the father, and preserv in jesu christ,
and called: 1:2 merci unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied.

1:3 beloved, when I gave all dilig to write unto you of the common
salvation, it wa need for me to write unto you, and exhort you
that ye should earnestli contend for the faith which wa once
deliv unto the saints.

1:4 for there are certain men crept in unawares, who were befor of
old ordain to thi condemnation, ungodli men, turn the grace of
our god into lasciviousness, and deni the onli lord god, and our
lord jesu christ.

1:5 I will therefor put you in remembrance, though ye onc knew this,
how that the lord, have save the peopl out of the land of egypt,
afterward destroy them that believ not.

1:6 and the angel which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he hath reserv in everlast chain under darkness
unto the judgment of the great day.

1:7 even as sodom and gomorrha, and the citi about them in like
manner, give themselv over to fornication, and go after strange
flesh, are set forth for an example, suffer the vengeanc of
etern fire.

1:8 likewis also these filthi dreamer defil the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

1:9 yet michael the archangel, when contend with the devil he
disput about the bodi of moses, durst not bring against him a
rail accusation, but said, the lord rebuk thee.

1:10 but these speak evil of those thing which they know not: but
what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those thing they
corrupt themselves.

1:11 woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of cain, and ran
greedili after the error of balaam for reward, and perish in the
gainsay of core.

1:12 these are spot in your feast of charity, when they feast with
you, feed themselv without fear: cloud they are without water,
carri about of winds; tree whose fruit withereth, without fruit,
twic dead, pluck up by the roots; 1:13 rage wave of the sea,
foam out their own shame; wander stars, to whom is reserv the
black of dark for ever.

1:14 and enoch also, the seventh from adam, prophesi of these,
saying, behold, the lord cometh with ten thousand of hi saints, 1:15
to execut judgment upon all, and to convinc all that are ungodly
among them of all their ungodli deed which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their hard speech which ungodli sinner have
spoken against him.

1:16 these are murmurers, complainers, walk after their own lusts;
and their mouth speaketh great swell words, have men' person in
admir becaus of advantage.

1:17 but, beloved, rememb ye the word which were spoken befor of
th apostl of our lord jesu christ; 1:18 how that they told you
ther should be mocker in the last time, who should walk after their
own ungodli lusts.

1:19 these be they who separ themselves, sensual, have not the
spirit.

1:20 but ye, beloved, build up yourselv on your most holi faith,
pray in the holi ghost, 1:21 keep yourselv in the love of god,
look for the merci of our lord jesu christ unto etern life.

1:22 and of some have compassion, make a difference: 1:23 and others
sav with fear, pull them out of the fire; hate even the garment
spot by the flesh.

1:24 now unto him that is abl to keep you from falling, and to
pres you faultless befor the presenc of hi glori with exceeding
joy, 1:25 To the onli wise god our saviour, be glori and majesty,
dominion and power, both now and ever. amen.




th revel of saint john the devine


1:1 the revel of jesu christ, which god gave unto him, to shew
unto hi servant thing which must shortli come to pass; and he sent
and signifi it by hi angel unto hi servant john: 1:2 who bare
record of the word of god, and of the testimoni of jesu christ, and
of all thing that he saw.

1:3 bless is he that readeth, and they that hear the word of this
prophecy, and keep those thing which are written therein: for the
tim is at hand.

1:4 john to the seven church which are in asia: grace be unto you,
and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and
from the seven spirit which are befor hi throne; 1:5 and from jesus
christ, who is the faith witness, and the first begotten of the
dead, and the princ of the king of the earth. unto him that loved
us, and wash us from our sin in hi own blood, 1:6 and hath made us
k and priest unto god and hi father; to him be glori and
dominion for ever and ever. amen.

1:7 behold, he cometh with clouds; and everi eye shall see him, and
they also which pierc him: and all kindr of the earth shall wail
becaus of him. even so, amen.

1:8 I am alpha and omega, the begin and the ending, saith the
lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the almighty.

1:9 I john, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation,
and in the kingdom and patienc of jesu christ, wa in the isl that
i call patmos, for the word of god, and for the testimoni of jesus
christ.

1:10 I wa in the spirit on the lord' day, and heard behind me a
great voice, as of a trumpet, 1:11 saying, I am alpha and omega, the
first and the last: and, what thou seest, write in a book, and send it
unto the seven church which are in asia; unto ephesus, and unto
smyrna, and unto pergamos, and unto thyatira, and unto sardis, and
unto philadelphia, and unto laodicea.

1:12 and I turn to see the voic that spake with me. and being
turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks; 1:13 and in the midst of the
seven candlestick one like unto the son of man, cloth with a
gar down to the foot, and girt about the pap with a golden
girdle.

1:14 hi head and hi hair were white like wool, as white as snow;
and hi eye were as a flame of fire; 1:15 and hi feet like unto fine
brass, as if they burn in a furnace; and hi voic as the sound of
mani waters.

1:16 and he had in hi right hand seven stars: and out of hi mouth
went a sharp twoedg sword: and hi counten wa as the sun
shineth in hi strength.

1:17 and when I saw him, I fell at hi feet as dead. and he laid his
right hand upon me, say unto me, fear not; I am the first and the
last: 1:18 I am he that liveth, and wa dead; and, behold, I am alive
for evermore, amen; and have the key of hell and of death.

1:19 write the thing which thou hast seen, and the thing which are,
and the thing which shall be hereafter; 1:20 the mysteri of the seven
star which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden
candlesticks. the seven star are the angel of the seven churches:
and the seven candlestick which thou sawest are the seven churches.

2:1 unto the angel of the church of ephesu write; these thing saith
h that holdeth the seven star in hi right hand, who walketh in the
midst of the seven golden candlesticks; 2:2 I know thi works, and thy
labour, and thi patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are
evil: and thou hast tri them which say they are apostles, and are
not, and hast found them liars: 2:3 and hast borne, and hast patience,
and for my name' sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted.

2:4 nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, becaus thou hast left
thi first love.

2:5 rememb therefor from whenc thou art fallen, and repent, and do
th first works; or els I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remov thi candlestick out of hi place, except thou repent.

2:6 but thi thou hast, that thou hatest the deed of the
nicolaitanes, which I also hate.

2:7 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the paradis of god.

2:8 and unto the angel of the church in smyrna write; these things
saith the first and the last, which wa dead, and is alive; 2:9 I know
thi works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and i
know the blasphemi of them which say they are jews, and are not, but
ar the synagogu of satan.

2:10 fear none of those thing which thou shalt suffer: behold, the
devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye
shal have tribul ten days: be thou faith unto death, and i
wil give thee a crown of life.

2:11 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches; He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.

2:12 and to the angel of the church in pergamo write; these things
saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges; 2:13 I know thy
works, and where thou dwellest, even where satan' seat is: and thou
holdest fast my name, and hast not deni my faith, even in those days
wherein antipa wa my faith martyr, who wa slain among you, where
satan dwelleth.

2:14 but I have a few thing against thee, becaus thou hast there
them that hold the doctrin of balaam, who taught balac to cast a
stumblingblock befor the children of israel, to eat thing sacrificed
unto idols, and to commit fornication.

2:15 So hast thou also them that hold the doctrin of the
nicolaitanes, which thing I hate.

2:16 repent; or els I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth.

2:17 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden
manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knoweth save he that receiveth it.

2:18 and unto the angel of the church in thyatira write; these things
saith the son of god, who hath hi eye like unto a flame of fire, and
hi feet are like fine brass; 2:19 I know thi works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and thi patience, and thi works; and the last to
b more than the first.

2:20 notwithstand I have a few thing against thee, becaus thou
sufferest that woman jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to
teach and to seduc my servant to commit fornication, and to eat
th sacrif unto idols.

2:21 and I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she
rep not.

2:22 behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery
with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

2:23 and I will kill her children with death; and all the churches
shal know that I am he which searcheth the rein and hearts: and i
wil give unto everi one of you accord to your works.

2:24 but unto you I say, and unto the rest in thyatira, as mani as
hav not thi doctrine, and which have not known the depth of satan,
a they speak; I will put upon you none other burden.

2:25 but that which ye have alreadi hold fast till I come.

2:26 and he that overcometh, and keepeth my work unto the end, to him
wil I give power over the nations: 2:27 and he shall rule them with a
rod of iron; as the vessel of a potter shall they be broken to
shivers: even as I receiv of my father.

2:28 and I will give him the morn star.

2:29 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:1 and unto the angel of the church in sardi write; these things
saith he that hath the seven spirit of god, and the seven stars; i
know thi works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.

3:2 Be watchful, and strengthen the thing which remain, that are
readi to die: for I have not found thi work perfect befor god.

3:3 rememb therefor how thou hast receiv and heard, and hold
fast, and repent. If therefor thou shalt not watch, I will come on
the as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon
thee.

3:4 thou hast a few name even in sardi which have not defil their
garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.

3:5 He that overcometh, the same shall be cloth in white raiment;
and I will not blot out hi name out of the book of life, but I will
confess hi name befor my father, and befor hi angels.

3:6 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:7 and to the angel of the church in philadelphia write; these things
saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of david,
h that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man
openeth; 3:8 I know thi works: behold, I have set befor thee an open
door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a littl strength, and
hast kept my word, and hast not deni my name.

3:9 behold, I will make them of the synagogu of satan, which say they
ar jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to come
and worship befor thi feet, and to know that I have love thee.

3:10 becaus thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep
the from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world,
to tri them that dwell upon the earth.

3:11 behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no
man take thi crown.

3:12 him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the templ of my god,
and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my
god, and the name of the citi of my god, which is new jerusalem, which
cometh down out of heaven from my god: and I will write upon him my
new name.

3:13 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

3:14 and unto the angel of the church of the laodicean write; these
th saith the amen, the faith and true witness, the begin of
th creation of god; 3:15 I know thi works, that thou art neither cold
nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.

3:16 So then becaus thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, i
wil spue thee out of my mouth.

3:17 becaus thou sayest, I am rich, and increas with goods, and
hav need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: 3:18 I counsel thee to buy
of me gold tri in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white
raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy
naked do not appear; and anoint thine eye with eyesalve, that
thou mayest see.

3:19 As mani as I love, I rebuk and chasten: be zealou therefore,
and repent.

3:20 behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if ani man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
h with me.

3:21 To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my father in hi throne.

3:22 He that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the
churches.

4:1 after thi I looked, and, behold, a door wa open in heaven: and
th first voic which I heard wa as it were of a trumpet talk with
me; which said, come up hither, and I will shew thee thing which must
b hereafter.

4:2 and immedi I wa in the spirit: and, behold, a throne wa set
in heaven, and one sat on the throne.

4:3 and he that sat wa to look upon like a jasper and a sardine
stone: and there wa a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like
unto an emerald.

4:4 and round about the throne were four and twenti seats: and upon
th seat I saw four and twenti elder sitting, cloth in white
raiment; and they had on their head crown of gold.

4:5 and out of the throne proceed lightn and thunder and
voices: and there were seven lamp of fire burn befor the throne,
which are the seven spirit of god.

4:6 and befor the throne there wa a sea of glass like unto crystal:
and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four
beast full of eye befor and behind.

4:7 and the first beast wa like a lion, and the second beast like a
calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast
wa like a fli eagle.

4:8 and the four beast had each of them six wing about him; and they
wer full of eye within: and they rest not day and night, saying,
holy, holy, holy, lord god almighty, which was, and is, and is to
come.

4:9 and when those beast give glori and honour and thank to him that
sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever, 4:10 the four and
twenti elder fall down befor him that sat on the throne, and worship
him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crown befor the
throne, saying, 4:11 thou art worthy, O lord, to receiv glori and
honour and power: for thou hast creat all things, and for thy
pleasur they are and were created.

5:1 and I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book
written within and on the backside, seal with seven seals.

5:2 and I saw a strong angel proclaim with a loud voice, who is
worthi to open the book, and to loos the seal thereof?  5:3 and no
man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, wa abl to open
th book, neither to look thereon.

5:4 and I wept much, becaus no man wa found worthi to open and to
read the book, neither to look thereon.

5:5 and one of the elder saith unto me, weep not: behold, the lion of
th tribe of juda, the root of david, hath prevail to open the book,
and to loos the seven seal thereof.

5:6 and I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a lamb as it had been
slain, have seven horn and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits
of god sent forth into all the earth.

5:7 and he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that
sat upon the throne.

5:8 and when he had taken the book, the four beast and four and
twenti elder fell down befor the lamb, have everi one of them
harps, and golden vial full of odours, which are the prayer of
saints.

5:9 and they sung a new song, saying, thou art worthi to take the
book, and to open the seal thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast
redeem us to god by thi blood out of everi kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation; 5:10 and hast made us unto our god king and
priests: and we shall reign on the earth.

5:11 and I beheld, and I heard the voic of mani angel round about
th throne and the beast and the elders: and the number of them was
ten thousand time ten thousand, and thousand of thousands; 5:12
say with a loud voice, worthi is the lamb that wa slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory,
and blessing.

5:13 and everi creatur which is in heaven, and on the earth, and
und the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them,
heard I saying, blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto
him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever.

5:14 and the four beast said, amen. and the four and twenti elders
fel down and worship him that liveth for ever and ever.

6:1 and I saw when the lamb open one of the seals, and I heard, as
it were the nois of thunder, one of the four beast saying, come and
see.

6:2 and I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a
bow; and a crown wa given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and
to conquer.

6:3 and when he had open the second seal, I heard the second beast
say, come and see.

6:4 and there went out anoth hors that wa red: and power wa given
to him that sat thereon to take peac from the earth, and that they
should kill one another: and there wa given unto him a great sword.

6:5 and when he had open the third seal, I heard the third beast
say, come and see. and I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat
on him had a pair of balanc in hi hand.

6:6 and I heard a voic in the midst of the four beast say, A measure
of wheat for a penny, and three measur of barley for a penny; and
se thou hurt not the oil and the wine.

6:7 and when he had open the fourth seal, I heard the voic of the
fourth beast say, come and see.

6:8 and I looked, and behold a pale horse: and hi name that sat on
him wa death, and hell follow with him. and power wa given unto
them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with
hunger, and with death, and with the beast of the earth.

6:9 and when he had open the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the
soul of them that were slain for the word of god, and for the
testimoni which they held: 6:10 and they cri with a loud voice,
saying, how long, O lord, holi and true, dost thou not judg and
aveng our blood on them that dwell on the earth?  6:11 and white
rob were given unto everi one of them; and it wa said unto them,
that they should rest yet for a littl season, until their
fellowserv also and their brethren, that should be kill as they
were, should be fulfilled.

6:12 and I beheld when he had open the sixth seal, and, lo, there
wa a great earthquake; and the sun becam black as sackcloth of hair,
and the moon becam as blood; 6:13 and the star of heaven fell unto
th earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untim figs, when she is
shaken of a mighti wind.

6:14 and the heaven depart as a scroll when it is roll together;
and everi mountain and island were move out of their places.

6:15 and the king of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men,
and the chief captains, and the mighti men, and everi bondman, and
everi free man, hid themselv in the den and in the rock of the
mountains; 6:16 and said to the mountain and rocks, fall on us, and
hid us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the
wrath of the lamb: 6:17 for the great day of hi wrath is come; and
who shall be abl to stand?  7:1 and after these thing I saw four
angel stand on the four corner of the earth, hold the four
wind of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on
th sea, nor on ani tree.

7:2 and I saw anoth angel ascend from the east, have the seal
of the live god: and he cri with a loud voic to the four angels,
to whom it wa given to hurt the earth and the sea, 7:3 saying, hurt
not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have seal the
serv of our god in their foreheads.

7:4 and I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were
s an hundr and forti and four thousand of all the tribe of the
children of israel.

7:5 Of the tribe of juda were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe of
reuben were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe of gad were sealed
twelv thousand.

7:6 Of the tribe of aser were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe of
nephthalim were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe of manass were
s twelv thousand.

7:7 Of the tribe of simeon were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe
of levi were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe of issachar were
s twelv thousand.

7:8 Of the tribe of zabulon were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe
of joseph were seal twelv thousand. Of the tribe of benjamin were
s twelv thousand.

7:9 after thi I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues,
stood befor the throne, and befor the lamb, cloth with white
robes, and palm in their hands; 7:10 and cri with a loud voice,
saying, salvat to our god which sitteth upon the throne, and unto
th lamb.

7:11 and all the angel stood round about the throne, and about the
eld and the four beasts, and fell befor the throne on their faces,
and worship god, 7:12 saying, amen: blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto
our god for ever and ever. amen.

7:13 and one of the elder answered, say unto me, what are these
which are array in white robes? and whenc came they?  7:14 and i
said unto him, sir, thou knowest. and he said to me, these are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have wash their robes, and
mad them white in the blood of the lamb.

7:15 therefor are they befor the throne of god, and serv him day
and night in hi temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell
among them.

7:16 they shall hunger no more, neither thirst ani more; neither shall
th sun light on them, nor ani heat.

7:17 for the lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them,
and shall lead them unto live fountain of waters: and god shall
wip away all tear from their eyes.

8:1 and when he had open the seventh seal, there wa silenc in
heaven about the space of half an hour.

8:2 and I saw the seven angel which stood befor god; and to them
wer given seven trumpets.

8:3 and anoth angel came and stood at the altar, have a golden
censer; and there wa given unto him much incense, that he should
off it with the prayer of all saint upon the golden altar which
wa befor the throne.

8:4 and the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayer of the
saints, ascend up befor god out of the angel' hand.

8:5 and the angel took the censer, and fill it with fire of the
altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and
thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.

8:6 and the seven angel which had the seven trumpet prepared
themselv to sound.

8:7 the first angel sounded, and there follow hail and fire mingled
with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of
tre wa burnt up, and all green grass wa burnt up.

8:8 and the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain
burn with fire wa cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea
becam blood; 8:9 and the third part of the creatur which were in
th sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ship were
destroyed.

8:10 and the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven, burn as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of
th rivers, and upon the fountain of waters; 8:11 and the name of the
star is call wormwood: and the third part of the water became
wormwood; and mani men die of the waters, becaus they were made
bitter.

8:12 and the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the
stars; so as the third part of them wa darkened, and the day shone
not for a third part of it, and the night likewise.

8:13 and I beheld, and heard an angel fli through the midst of
heaven, say with a loud voice, woe, woe, woe, to the inhabit of
th earth by reason of the other voic of the trumpet of the three
angels, which are yet to sound!  9:1 and the fifth angel sounded, and
i saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him wa given the
key of the bottomless pit.

9:2 and he open the bottomless pit; and there aros a smoke out of
th pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were
darken by reason of the smoke of the pit.

9:3 and there came out of the smoke locust upon the earth: and unto
them wa given power, as the scorpion of the earth have power.

9:4 and it wa command them that they should not hurt the grass of
th earth, neither ani green thing, neither ani tree; but onli those
men which have not the seal of god in their foreheads.

9:5 and to them it wa given that they should not kill them, but that
they should be torment five months: and their torment wa as the
tor of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.

9:6 and in those day shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and
shal desir to die, and death shall flee from them.

9:7 and the shape of the locust were like unto hors prepar unto
battle; and on their head were as it were crown like gold, and their
fac were as the face of men.

9:8 and they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as
th teeth of lions.

9:9 and they had breastplates, as it were breastplat of iron; and
th sound of their wing wa as the sound of chariot of mani horses
run to battle.

9:10 and they had tail like unto scorpions, and there were sting in
their tails: and their power wa to hurt men five months.

9:11 and they had a king over them, which is the angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name in the hebrew tongu is abaddon, but in the
greek tongu hath hi name apollyon.

9:12 one woe is past; and, behold, there come two woe more hereafter.

9:13 and the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voic from the four
horn of the golden altar which is befor god, 9:14 say to the
sixth angel which had the trumpet, loos the four angel which are
bound in the great river euphrates.

9:15 and the four angel were loosed, which were prepar for an hour,
and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.

9:16 and the number of the armi of the horsemen were two hundred
thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them.

9:17 and thu I saw the hors in the vision, and them that sat on
them, have breastplat of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and
th head of the hors were as the head of lions; and out of their
mouth issu fire and smoke and brimstone.

9:18 By these three wa the third part of men killed, by the fire, and
bi the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issu out of their mouths.

9:19 for their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their
tail were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do
hurt.

9:20 and the rest of the men which were not kill by these plagues
yet repent not of the work of their hands, that they should not
worship devils, and idol of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone,
and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: 9:21 neither
rep they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their
fornication, nor of their thefts.

10:1 and I saw anoth mighti angel come down from heaven, clothed
with a cloud: and a rainbow wa upon hi head, and hi face wa as it
wer the sun, and hi feet as pillar of fire: 10:2 and he had in his
hand a littl book open: and he set hi right foot upon the sea, and
hi left foot on the earth, 10:3 and cri with a loud voice, as when
a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunder utter their
voices.

10:4 and when the seven thunder had utter their voices, I wa about
to write: and I heard a voic from heaven say unto me, seal up
thos thing which the seven thunder uttered, and write them not.

10:5 and the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth
lift up hi hand to heaven, 10:6 and sware by him that liveth for
ev and ever, who creat heaven, and the thing that therein are,
and the earth, and the thing that therein are, and the sea, and the
th which are therein, that there should be time no longer: 10:7
but in the day of the voic of the seventh angel, when he shall begin
to sound, the mysteri of god should be finished, as he hath declared
to hi servant the prophets.

10:8 and the voic which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and
said, Go and take the littl book which is open in the hand of the
angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.

10:9 and I went unto the angel, and said unto him, give me the little
book. and he said unto me, take it, and eat it up; and it shall make
thi belli bitter, but it shall be in thi mouth sweet as honey.

10:10 and I took the littl book out of the angel' hand, and ate it
up; and it wa in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten
it, my belli wa bitter.

10:11 and he said unto me, thou must prophesi again befor many
peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.

11:1 and there wa given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel
stood, saying, rise, and measur the templ of god, and the altar, and
them that worship therein.

11:2 but the court which is without the templ leav out, and measure
it not; for it is given unto the gentiles: and the holi citi shall
they tread under foot forti and two months.

11:3 and I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophesi a thousand two hundr and threescor days, cloth in
sackcloth.

11:4 these are the two oliv trees, and the two candlestick standing
befor the god of the earth.

11:5 and if ani man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if ani man will hurt them, he
must in thi manner be killed.

11:6 these have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the day of
their prophecy: and have power over water to turn them to blood, and
to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

11:7 and when they shall have finish their testimony, the beast that
ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and
shal overcom them, and kill them.

11:8 and their dead bodi shall lie in the street of the great city,
which spiritu is call sodom and egypt, where also our lord was
crucified.

11:9 and they of the peopl and kindr and tongu and nation shall
se their dead bodi three day and an half, and shall not suffer
their dead bodi to be put in graves.

11:10 and they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoic over them, and
mak merry, and shall send gift one to another; becaus these two
prophet torment them that dwelt on the earth.

11:11 and after three day and an half the spirit of life from god
ent into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell
upon them which saw them.

11:12 and they heard a great voic from heaven say unto them, come
up hither. and they ascend up to heaven in a cloud; and their
enemi beheld them.

11:13 and the same hour wa there a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the citi fell, and in the earthquak were slain of men seven
thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glori to the god
of heaven.

11:14 the second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh
quickly.

11:15 and the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voic in
heaven, saying, the kingdom of thi world are becom the kingdom of
our lord, and of hi christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

11:16 and the four and twenti elders, which sat befor god on their
seats, fell upon their faces, and worship god, 11:17 saying, we
giv thee thanks, O lord god almighty, which art, and wast, and art to
come; becaus thou hast taken to thee thi great power, and hast
reigned.

11:18 and the nation were angry, and thi wrath is come, and the time
of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give
reward unto thi servant the prophets, and to the saints, and them
that fear thi name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which
destroy the earth.

11:19 and the templ of god wa open in heaven, and there wa seen
in hi templ the ark of hi testament: and there were lightnings, and
voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.

12:1 and there appear a great wonder in heaven; a woman cloth with
th sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelv stars: 12:2 and she be with child cried, travail in
birth, and pain to be delivered.

12:3 and there appear anoth wonder in heaven; and behold a great
r dragon, have seven head and ten horns, and seven crown upon
hi heads.

12:4 and hi tail drew the third part of the star of heaven, and did
cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood befor the woman which
wa readi to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was
born.

12:5 and she brought forth a man child, who wa to rule all nations
with a rod of iron: and her child wa caught up unto god, and to his
throne.

12:6 and the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place
prepar of god, that they should feed her there a thousand two
hundr and threescor days.

12:7 and there wa war in heaven: michael and hi angel fought
against the dragon; and the dragon fought and hi angels, 12:8 and
prevail not; neither wa their place found ani more in heaven.

12:9 and the great dragon wa cast out, that old serpent, call the
devil, and satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he wa cast out
into the earth, and hi angel were cast out with him.

12:10 and I heard a loud voic say in heaven, now is come
salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our god, and the power of
hi christ: for the accus of our brethren is cast down, which
accus them befor our god day and night.

12:11 and they overcam him by the blood of the lamb, and by the word
of their testimony; and they love not their live unto the death.

12:12 therefor rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. woe to
th inhabit of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down
unto you, have great wrath, becaus he knoweth that he hath but a
short time.

12:13 and when the dragon saw that he wa cast unto the earth, he
persecut the woman which brought forth the man child.

12:14 and to the woman were given two wing of a great eagle, that she
might fli into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished
for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.

12:15 and the serpent cast out of hi mouth water as a flood after the
woman, that he might caus her to be carri away of the flood.

12:16 and the earth help the woman, and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow up the flood which the dragon cast out of hi mouth.

12:17 and the dragon wa wroth with the woman, and went to make war
with the remnant of her seed, which keep the command of god, and
hav the testimoni of jesu christ.

13:1 and I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out
of the sea, have seven head and ten horns, and upon hi horn ten
crowns, and upon hi head the name of blasphemy.

13:2 and the beast which I saw wa like unto a leopard, and hi feet
wer as the feet of a bear, and hi mouth as the mouth of a lion: and
th dragon gave him hi power, and hi seat, and great authority.

13:3 and I saw one of hi head as it were wound to death; and his
deadli wound wa healed: and all the world wonder after the beast.

13:4 and they worship the dragon which gave power unto the beast:
and they worship the beast, saying, who is like unto the beast? who
i abl to make war with him?  13:5 and there wa given unto him a
mouth speak great thing and blasphemies; and power wa given unto
him to continu forti and two months.

13:6 and he open hi mouth in blasphemi against god, to blaspheme
hi name, and hi tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

13:7 and it wa given unto him to make war with the saints, and to
overcom them: and power wa given him over all kindreds, and tongues,
and nations.

13:8 and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names
ar not written in the book of life of the lamb slain from the
found of the world.

13:9 If ani man have an ear, let him hear.

13:10 He that leadeth into captiv shall go into captivity: he that
killeth with the sword must be kill with the sword. here is the
pati and the faith of the saints.

13:11 and I beheld anoth beast come up out of the earth; and he
had two horn like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.

13:12 and he exerciseth all the power of the first beast befor him,
and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the
first beast, whose deadli wound wa healed.

13:13 and he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down
from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, 13:14 and deceiveth them
that dwell on the earth by the mean of those miracl which he had
pow to do in the sight of the beast; say to them that dwell on
th earth, that they should make an imag to the beast, which had the
wound by a sword, and did live.

13:15 and he had power to give life unto the imag of the beast, that
th imag of the beast should both speak, and caus that as mani as
would not worship the imag of the beast should be killed.

13:16 and he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free
and bond, to receiv a mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads: 13:17 and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had
th mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of hi name.

13:18 here is wisdom. let him that hath understand count the number
of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and hi number is six
hundr threescor and six.

14:1 and I looked, and, lo, a lamb stood on the mount sion, and with
him an hundr forti and four thousand, have hi father' name
written in their foreheads.

14:2 and I heard a voic from heaven, as the voic of mani waters, and
a the voic of a great thunder: and I heard the voic of harpers
harp with their harps: 14:3 and they sung as it were a new song
befor the throne, and befor the four beasts, and the elders: and no
man could learn that song but the hundr and forti and four thousand,
which were redeem from the earth.

14:4 these are they which were not defil with women; for they are
virgins. these are they which follow the lamb whithersoev he goeth.
thes were redeem from among men, be the firstfruit unto god and
to the lamb.

14:5 and in their mouth wa found no guile: for they are without fault
befor the throne of god.

14:6 and I saw anoth angel fli in the midst of heaven, have the
everlast gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to
everi nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, 14:7 say with a
loud voice, fear god, and give glori to him; for the hour of his
judg is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the
sea, and the fountain of waters.

14:8 and there follow anoth angel, saying, babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that great city, becaus she made all nation drink of the
win of the wrath of her fornication.

14:9 and the third angel follow them, say with a loud voice, if
ani man worship the beast and hi image, and receiv hi mark in his
forehead, or in hi hand, 14:10 the same shall drink of the wine of
th wrath of god, which is pour out without mixtur into the cup of
hi indignation; and he shall be torment with fire and brimston in
th presenc of the holi angels, and in the presenc of the lamb:
14:11 and the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever:
and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his
image, and whosoev receiveth the mark of hi name.

14:12 here is the patienc of the saints: here are they that keep the
command of god, and the faith of jesus.

14:13 and I heard a voic from heaven say unto me, write, blessed
ar the dead which die in the lord from henceforth: yea, saith the
spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their work do
follow them.

14:14 and I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one
sat like unto the son of man, have on hi head a golden crown, and
in hi hand a sharp sickle.

14:15 and anoth angel came out of the temple, cri with a loud
voic to him that sat on the cloud, thrust in thi sickle, and reap:
for the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is
ripe.

14:16 and he that sat on the cloud thrust in hi sickl on the earth;
and the earth wa reaped.

14:17 and anoth angel came out of the templ which is in heaven, he
also have a sharp sickle.

14:18 and anoth angel came out from the altar, which had power over
fire; and cri with a loud cri to him that had the sharp sickle,
saying, thrust in thi sharp sickle, and gather the cluster of the
vin of the earth; for her grape are fulli ripe.

14:19 and the angel thrust in hi sickl into the earth, and gathered
th vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the
wrath of god.

14:20 and the winepress wa trodden without the city, and blood came
out of the winepress, even unto the hors bridles, by the space of a
thousand and six hundr furlongs.

15:1 and I saw anoth sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven
angel have the seven last plagues; for in them is fill up the
wrath of god.

15:2 and I saw as it were a sea of glass mingl with fire: and them
that had gotten the victori over the beast, and over hi image, and
ov hi mark, and over the number of hi name, stand on the sea of
glass, have the harp of god.

15:3 and they sing the song of mose the servant of god, and the song
of the lamb, saying, great and marvel are thi works, lord god
almighty; just and true are thi ways, thou king of saints.

15:4 who shall not fear thee, O lord, and glorifi thi name? for thou
onli art holy: for all nation shall come and worship befor thee; for
thi judgment are made manifest.

15:5 and after that I looked, and, behold, the templ of the
tabernacl of the testimoni in heaven wa opened: 15:6 and the seven
angel came out of the temple, have the seven plagues, cloth in
pur and white linen, and have their breast gird with golden
girdles.

15:7 and one of the four beast gave unto the seven angel seven
golden vial full of the wrath of god, who liveth for ever and ever.

15:8 and the templ wa fill with smoke from the glori of god, and
from hi power; and no man wa abl to enter into the temple, till the
seven plagu of the seven angel were fulfilled.

16:1 and I heard a great voic out of the templ say to the seven
angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vial of the wrath of god upon
th earth.

16:2 and the first went, and pour out hi vial upon the earth; and
ther fell a noisom and grievou sore upon the men which had the mark
of the beast, and upon them which worship hi image.

16:3 and the second angel pour out hi vial upon the sea; and it
becam as the blood of a dead man: and everi live soul die in the
sea.

16:4 and the third angel pour out hi vial upon the river and
fountain of waters; and they becam blood.

16:5 and I heard the angel of the water say, thou art righteous, o
lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, becaus thou hast judged
thus.

16:6 for they have shed the blood of saint and prophets, and thou
hast given them blood to drink; for they are worthy.

16:7 and I heard anoth out of the altar say, even so, lord god
almighty, true and righteou are thi judgments.

16:8 and the fourth angel pour out hi vial upon the sun; and power
wa given unto him to scorch men with fire.

16:9 and men were scorch with great heat, and blasphem the name of
god, which hath power over these plagues: and they repent not to
giv him glory.

16:10 and the fifth angel pour out hi vial upon the seat of the
beast; and hi kingdom wa full of darkness; and they gnaw their
tongu for pain, 16:11 and blasphem the god of heaven becaus of
their pain and their sores, and repent not of their deeds.

16:12 and the sixth angel pour out hi vial upon the great river
euphrates; and the water thereof wa dri up, that the way of the
k of the east might be prepared.

16:13 and I saw three unclean spirit like frog come out of the mouth
of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth
of the fals prophet.

16:14 for they are the spirit of devils, work miracles, which go
forth unto the king of the earth and of the whole world, to gather
them to the battl of that great day of god almighty.

16:15 behold, I come as a thief. bless is he that watcheth, and
keepeth hi garments, lest he walk naked, and they see hi shame.

16:16 and he gather them togeth into a place call in the hebrew
tongu armageddon.

16:17 and the seventh angel pour out hi vial into the air; and
ther came a great voic out of the templ of heaven, from the throne,
saying, It is done.

16:18 and there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there
wa a great earthquake, such as wa not sinc men were upon the earth,
so mighti an earthquake, and so great.

16:19 and the great citi wa divid into three parts, and the cities
of the nation fell: and great babylon came in remembr befor god,
to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierc of hi wrath.

16:20 and everi island fled away, and the mountain were not found.

16:21 and there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, everi stone
about the weight of a talent: and men blasphem god becaus of the
plagu of the hail; for the plagu thereof wa exceed great.

17:1 and there came one of the seven angel which had the seven vials,
and talk with me, say unto me, come hither; I will shew unto thee
th judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon mani waters: 17:2
with whom the king of the earth have commit fornication, and the
inhabit of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication.

17:3 So he carri me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and i
saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colour beast, full of name of
blasphemy, have seven head and ten horns.

17:4 and the woman wa array in purpl and scarlet colour, and
deck with gold and preciou stone and pearls, have a golden cup
in her hand full of abomin and filthi of her fornication:
17:5 and upon her forehead wa a name written, mystery, babylon the
great, the mother OF harlot and abomin OF the earth.

17:6 and I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and
with the blood of the martyr of jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered
with great admiration.

17:7 and the angel said unto me, wherefor didst thou marvel? I will
tel thee the mysteri of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth
her, which hath the seven head and ten horns.

17:8 the beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out
of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on
th earth shall wonder, whose name were not written in the book of
lif from the foundat of the world, when they behold the beast that
was, and is not, and yet is.

17:9 and here is the mind which hath wisdom. the seven head are seven
mountains, on which the woman sitteth.

17:10 and there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the
oth is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continu a short
space.

17:11 and the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and
i of the seven, and goeth into perdition.

17:12 and the ten horn which thou sawest are ten kings, which have
receiv no kingdom as yet; but receiv power as king one hour with
th beast.

17:13 these have one mind, and shall give their power and strength
unto the beast.

17:14 these shall make war with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome
them: for he is lord of lords, and king of kings: and they that are
with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.

17:15 and he saith unto me, the water which thou sawest, where the
whor sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

17:16 and the ten horn which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall
hat the whore, and shall make her desol and naked, and shall eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire.

17:17 for god hath put in their heart to fulfil hi will, and to
agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the word of god
shal be fulfilled.

17:18 and the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which
reigneth over the king of the earth.

18:1 and after these thing I saw anoth angel come down from heaven,
hav great power; and the earth wa lighten with hi glory.

18:2 and he cri mightili with a strong voice, saying, babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and is becom the habit of devils,
and the hold of everi foul spirit, and a cage of everi unclean and
hat bird.

18:3 for all nation have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and the king of the earth have commit fornication
with her, and the merchant of the earth are wax rich through the
abund of her delicacies.

18:4 and I heard anoth voic from heaven, saying, come out of her,
mi people, that ye be not partak of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues.

18:5 for her sin have reach unto heaven, and god hath remembered
h iniquities.

18:6 reward her even as she reward you, and doubl unto her double
accord to her works: in the cup which she hath fill fill to her
double.

18:7 how much she hath glorifi herself, and live deliciously, so
much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a
queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.

18:8 therefor shall her plagu come in one day, death, and mourning,
and famine; and she shall be utterli burn with fire: for strong is
th lord god who judgeth her.

18:9 and the king of the earth, who have commit fornic and
liv delici with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when
they shall see the smoke of her burning, 18:10 stand afar off for
th fear of her torment, saying, alas, ala that great citi babylon,
that mighti city! for in one hour is thi judgment come.

18:11 and the merchant of the earth shall weep and mourn over her;
for no man buyeth their merchandis ani more: 18:12 the merchandis of
gold, and silver, and preciou stones, and of pearls, and fine linen,
and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyin wood, and all manner
vessel of ivory, and all manner vessel of most preciou wood, and of
brass, and iron, and marble, 18:13 and cinnamon, and odours, and
ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and
wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves,
and soul of men.

18:14 and the fruit that thi soul lust after are depart from
thee, and all thing which were dainti and goodli are depart from
thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.

18:15 the merchant of these things, which were made rich by her,
shal stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weep and wailing,
18:16 and saying, alas, ala that great city, that wa cloth in fine
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and deck with gold, and precious
stones, and pearls!  18:17 for in one hour so great rich is come to
nought. and everi shipmaster, and all the compani in ships, and
sailors, and as mani as trade by sea, stood afar off, 18:18 and cried
when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, what citi is like unto
thi great city!  18:19 and they cast dust on their heads, and cried,
weep and wailing, saying, alas, ala that great city, wherein were
mad rich all that had ship in the sea by reason of her costliness!
for in one hour is she made desolate.

18:20 rejoic over her, thou heaven, and ye holi apostl and
prophets; for god hath aveng you on her.

18:21 and a mighti angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and
cast it into the sea, saying, thu with violenc shall that great city
babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

18:22 and the voic of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman,
of whatsoev craft he be, shall be found ani more in thee; and the
sound of a millston shall be heard no more at all in thee; 18:23 and
th light of a candl shall shine no more at all in thee; and the
voic of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all
in thee: for thi merchant were the great men of the earth; for by thy
sorceri were all nation deceived.

18:24 and in her wa found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and
of all that were slain upon the earth.

19:1 and after these thing I heard a great voic of much peopl in
heaven, saying, alleluia; salvation, and glory, and honour, and power,
unto the lord our god: 19:2 for true and righteou are hi judgments:
for he hath judg the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with
her fornication, and hath aveng the blood of hi servant at her
hand.

19:3 and again they said, alleluia and her smoke rose up for ever and
ever.

19:4 and the four and twenti elder and the four beast fell down and
worship god that sat on the throne, saying, amen; alleluia.

19:5 and a voic came out of the throne, saying, prais our god, all
y hi servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.

19:6 and I heard as it were the voic of a great multitude, and as the
voic of mani waters, and as the voic of mighti thunderings, saying,
alleluia: for the lord god omnipot reigneth.

19:7 let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the
marriag of the lamb is come, and hi wife hath made herself ready.

19:8 and to her wa grant that she should be array in fine linen,
clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteous of saints.

19:9 and he saith unto me, write, bless are they which are called
unto the marriag supper of the lamb. and he saith unto me, these are
th true say of god.

19:10 and I fell at hi feet to worship him. and he said unto me, see
thou do it not: I am thi fellowservant, and of thi brethren that have
th testimoni of jesus: worship god: for the testimoni of jesu is the
spirit of prophecy.

19:11 and I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that
sat upon him wa call faith and true, and in righteous he
doth judg and make war.

19:12 hi eye were as a flame of fire, and on hi head were many
crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself.

19:13 and he wa cloth with a vestur dip in blood: and hi name
i call the word of god.

19:14 and the armi which were in heaven follow him upon white
horses, cloth in fine linen, white and clean.

19:15 and out of hi mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should
smit the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he
treadeth the winepress of the fierc and wrath of almighti god.

19:16 and he hath on hi vestur and on hi thigh a name written, king
of kings, and lord OF lords.

19:17 and I saw an angel stand in the sun; and he cri with a loud
voice, say to all the fowl that fli in the midst of heaven, come
and gather yourselv togeth unto the supper of the great god; 19:18
that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighti men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on
them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and
great.

19:19 and I saw the beast, and the king of the earth, and their
armies, gather togeth to make war against him that sat on the
horse, and against hi army.

19:20 and the beast wa taken, and with him the fals prophet that
wrought miracl befor him, with which he deceiv them that had
receiv the mark of the beast, and them that worship hi image.
thes both were cast aliv into a lake of fire burn with brimstone.

19:21 and the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon
th horse, which sword proceed out of hi mouth: and all the fowls
wer fill with their flesh.

20:1 and I saw an angel come down from heaven, have the key of the
bottomless pit and a great chain in hi hand.

20:2 and he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the
devil, and satan, and bound him a thousand years, 20:3 and cast him
into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceiv the nation no more, till the thousand years
should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loos a littl season.

20:4 and I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment wa given
unto them: and I saw the soul of them that were behead for the
wit of jesus, and for the word of god, and which had not
worship the beast, neither hi image, neither had receiv hi mark
upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they live and reigned
with christ a thousand years.

20:5 but the rest of the dead live not again until the thousand years
wer finished. thi is the first resurrection.

20:6 bless and holi is he that hath part in the first resurrection:
on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priest of
god and of christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

20:7 and when the thousand year are expired, satan shall be loosed
out of hi prison, 20:8 and shall go out to deceiv the nation which
ar in the four quarter of the earth, gog, and magog, to gather them
togeth to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.

20:9 and they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compass the
camp of the saint about, and the belov city: and fire came down
from god out of heaven, and devour them.

20:10 and the devil that deceiv them wa cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and the fals prophet are, and shall be
tor day and night for ever and ever.

20:11 and I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from
whos face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there wa found no
plac for them.

20:12 and I saw the dead, small and great, stand befor god; and the
book were opened: and anoth book wa opened, which is the book of
life: and the dead were judg out of those thing which were written
in the books, accord to their works.

20:13 and the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and
hel deliv up the dead which were in them: and they were judged
everi man accord to their works.

20:14 and death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. thi is the
second death.

20:15 and whosoev wa not found written in the book of life wa cast
into the lake of fire.

21:1 and I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and
th first earth were pass away; and there wa no more sea.

21:2 and I john saw the holi city, new jerusalem, come down from god
out of heaven, prepar as a bride adorn for her husband.

21:3 and I heard a great voic out of heaven saying, behold, the
tabernacl of god is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shal be hi people, and god himself shall be with them, and be their
god.

21:4 and god shall wipe away all tear from their eyes; and there
shal be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
ther be ani more pain: for the former thing are pass away.

21:5 and he that sat upon the throne said, behold, I make all things
new.

and he said unto me, write: for these word are true and faithful.

21:6 and he said unto me, It is done. I am alpha and omega, the
begin and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the
fountain of the water of life freely.

21:7 He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his
god, and he shall be my son.

21:8 but the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all
liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death.

21:9 and there came unto me one of the seven angel which had the
seven vial full of the seven last plagues, and talk with me,
saying, come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the lamb' wife.

21:10 and he carri me away in the spirit to a great and high
mountain, and shew me that great city, the holi jerusalem,
descend out of heaven from god, 21:11 have the glori of god: and
her light wa like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper
stone, clear as crystal; 21:12 and had a wall great and high, and had
twelv gates, and at the gate twelv angels, and name written
thereon, which are the name of the twelv tribe of the children of
israel: 21:13 On the east three gates; on the north three gates; on
th south three gates; and on the west three gates.

21:14 and the wall of the citi had twelv foundations, and in them the
nam of the twelv apostl of the lamb.

21:15 and he that talk with me had a golden reed to measur the
city, and the gate thereof, and the wall thereof.

21:16 and the citi lieth foursquare, and the length is as larg as the
breadth: and he measur the citi with the reed, twelv thousand
furlongs.

th length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.

21:17 and he measur the wall thereof, an hundr and forti and four
cubits, accord to the measur of a man, that is, of the angel.

21:18 and the build of the wall of it wa of jasper: and the city
wa pure gold, like unto clear glass.

21:19 and the foundat of the wall of the citi were garnish with
al manner of preciou stones. the first foundat wa jasper; the
second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, an emerald;
21:20 the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh,
chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a
chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.

21:21 and the twelv gate were twelv pearls: everi sever gate was
of one pearl: and the street of the citi wa pure gold, as it were
transpar glass.

21:22 and I saw no templ therein: for the lord god almighti and the
lamb are the templ of it.

21:23 and the citi had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to
shin in it: for the glori of god did lighten it, and the lamb is the
light thereof.

21:24 and the nation of them which are save shall walk in the light
of it: and the king of the earth do bring their glori and honour into
it.

21:25 and the gate of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there
shal be no night there.

21:26 and they shall bring the glori and honour of the nation into
it.

21:27 and there shall in no wise enter into it ani thing that
defileth, neither whatsoev worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but
they which are written in the lamb' book of life.

22:1 and he shew me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
proceed out of the throne of god and of the lamb.

22:2 In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the
river, wa there the tree of life, which bare twelv manner of fruits,
and yield her fruit everi month: and the leav of the tree were for
th heal of the nations.

22:3 and there shall be no more curse: but the throne of god and of
th lamb shall be in it; and hi servant shall serv him: 22:4 and
they shall see hi face; and hi name shall be in their foreheads.

22:5 and there shall be no night there; and they need no candle,
neith light of the sun; for the lord god giveth them light: and they
shal reign for ever and ever.

22:6 and he said unto me, these say are faith and true: and the
lord god of the holi prophet sent hi angel to shew unto hi servants
th thing which must shortli be done.

22:7 behold, I come quickly: bless is he that keepeth the say of
th propheci of thi book.

22:8 and I john saw these things, and heard them. and when I had heard
and seen, I fell down to worship befor the feet of the angel which
shew me these things.

22:9 then saith he unto me, see thou do it not: for I am thy
fellowservant, and of thi brethren the prophets, and of them which
keep the say of thi book: worship god.

22:10 and he saith unto me, seal not the say of the propheci of
thi book: for the time is at hand.

22:11 He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is
filthy, let him be filthi still: and he that is righteous, let him be
right still: and he that is holy, let him be holi still.

22:12 and, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give
everi man accord as hi work shall be.

22:13 I am alpha and omega, the begin and the end, the first and
th last.

22:14 bless are they that do hi commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gate into the
city.

22:15 for without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoev loveth and maketh a lie.

22:16 I jesu have sent mine angel to testifi unto you these thing in
th churches. I am the root and the offspr of david, and the bright
and morn star.

22:17 and the spirit and the bride say, come. and let him that heareth
say, come. and let him that is athirst come. and whosoev will, let
him take the water of life freely.

22:18 for I testifi unto everi man that heareth the word of the
propheci of thi book, If ani man shall add unto these things, god
shal add unto him the plagu that are written in thi book: 22:19
and if ani man shall take away from the word of the book of this
prophecy, god shall take away hi part out of the book of life, and
out of the holi city, and from the thing which are written in thi book.

22:20 He which testifieth these thing saith, sure I come quickly.
amen.

even so, come, lord jesus.

22:21 the grace of our lord jesu christ be with you all. amen.
 